








GUIDELINES ON
HUMAN RESOURCES FOR
HEALTH FOR
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION (NHM)
2022
NATIONAL HEALTH SYSTEMS RESOURCE CENTRE
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE




































LIST
OF
ABBREVIATIONS
List of Abbreviations
ANM Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ASMD Additional Secretary and Mission Director
CV Curriculum Vitae
DA Dearness Allowance
DHFW Department of Health and Family Welfare
DHS District Health Society
EAG Empowered Action Group
ESI Employee’s State Insurance
HR Human Resources
HRH Human Resources for Health
HRMIS Human Resources Management Information System
IPHS Indian Public Health Standards
JD Job Description
MEITY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MPW Multipurpose Health Worker
NHM National Health Mission
NHP National Health Policy
NIC National Informatics Centre


#### [Table Content]
| ANM | Auxiliary Nurse Midwife |
| --- | --- |
| ASMD | Additional Secretary and Mission Director |
| CV | Curriculum Vitae |
| DA | Dearness Allowance |
| DHFW | Department of Health and Family Welfare |
| DHS | District Health Society |
| EAG | Empowered Action Group |
| ESI | Employee’s State Insurance |
| HR | Human Resources |
| HRH | Human Resources for Health |
| HRMIS | Human Resources Management Information System |
| IPHS | Indian Public Health Standards |
| JD | Job Description |
| MEITY | Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology |
| MoHFW | Ministry of Health and Family Welfare |
| MPW | Multipurpose Health Worker |
| NHM | National Health Mission |
| NHP | National Health Policy |
| NIC | National Informatics Centre |




SNOITAIVERBBA
FO
TSIL
NHSRC National Health Systems Resource Centre
NPCC National Programme Co-ordination Committee
NRHM National Rural Health Mission
NUHM National Urban Health Mission
PF Provident Fund
PFMS Public Financial Management System
PM Programme Management
PMU Programme Management Unit
PPP Public Private Partnership
PSC Public Service Commission
ROP Record of Proceedings
SHS State Health Society
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
SNCU Special New-born Care Unit
TA Travel Allowance
TOR Terms of Reference


#### [Table Content]
| NPCC | National Programme Co-ordination Committee |
| --- | --- |
| NRHM | National Rural Health Mission |
| NUHM | National Urban Health Mission |
| PF | Provident Fund |
| PFMS | Public Financial Management System |
| PM | Programme Management |
| PMU | Programme Management Unit |
| PPP | Public Private Partnership |
| PSC | Public Service Commission |
| ROP | Record of Proceedings |
| SHS | State Health Society |
| SOP | Standard Operating Procedure |
| SNCU | Special New-born Care Unit |
| TA | Travel Allowance |
| TOR | Terms of Reference |




CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Chapter 1. Introduction 1-2
1.1. Purpose of the Guidelines 2
Chapter 2. Human Resource for Health under NHM 3-4
2.1.1. Service Delivery 3
2.1.2. Programme Management 3
2.1.3. Support Service 4
2.1.4. Other HR 4
Chapter 3. HRH Policy, Principles and Strategies 5-7
3.1. Human Resource Principles in NHM 5
3.2. Key Strategies 6
Chapter 4. Modes of Engagement under NHM 8-10
4.1. Engagement of Staff on Contractual Basis 8
4.2. Engagement through Outsourcing 8
4.3. Engagement through Deputation 9
4.4. Engagement of Interns/Fellows 9
4.5. Engagement of Retired Government Officials 9
4.6. Engagement of HR through Partner Agencies 9
4.7. Other Engagements 10
Chapter 5. Recruitment 11-16
5.1. Bodies Conducting Recruitment 11
5.2. Recruitment Committee 12
5.3. Process of Recruitment 12
5.3.1. Identification and Validation of Vacancies 12
5.3.2. Review Job Description (JD) / Terms of Reference (ToR) 13



STNETNOC
5.3.4. Stages of Selection 14
5.3.5. Review CVs and Shortlist Applications 14
5.3.6. Proceed through the Selection Stages 14
5.3.7. Reference Check 15
5.3.8. Final Result and its Dissemination 15
Chapter 6. Appointment and Onboarding 17-18
6.1. Joining Formalities 17
6.1.1. Appointment / Offer Letter 17
6.1.2. Issuance of Identity Card 18
6.1.3. Attendance 18
6.2. Orientation 18
6.3. Probation 18
Chapter 7. Capacity Building/Capacity Development 19-21
7.1.1. Induction Training 19
7.1.2. In-Service Training 20
7.1.3. Programmatic Training 20
7.1.4. Skill Enhancement Training 20
7.2. Nodal Agency/Apex Body for Capacity Building 20
7.3. Training Management 21
7.4. Training Material 21
Chapter 8. Employee Management 22-27
8.1. Contract Management 22
8.2. Performance Appraisal 22
8.2.1. Rewards and Recognition 23
8.3. Expenses Policy 23
8.4. Leave Policy 23
8.4.1. Public Holidays 23
8.5. Employee Welfare 23
8.5.1. Occupational Health, Stress Management and Employee
Safety 24
8.5.2. Living Quarters 24
8.6. Compensation/Salaries and other Benefits 24
8.6.1. Compensation/salaries and Increments 24
8.6.2. Allowances, Incentives and other Benefits 25
8.7. Posting and Transfer 26
8.7.1. Career Progression 26
8.8. Grievance Redressal Policy and Procedure 26
8.9. Employee Separation 27
8.10. Tools for HR Management 27
8.10.1. Human Resource Information Management Systems (HRMIS) 27



CONTENTS
9.1. Contents of Code of Conduct Policy 28
9.2. Breach of Code of Conduct 29
9.3. Anti-Harassment Committee 29
Annexure I. Suggestive Procedural Formats 30-88
Deputation Principles and Process 30
Process of Designing Job Description/ToR 32
Sample ToRs/ Roles and Responsibilities 34
Stages of Selection 51
Contents of Offer Letter 53
Contents of the Contract 54
Induction Training Schedule of M&E Officer 58
Training Needs Assessment 59
Process of Performance Appraisal 60
Expenses Policy 68
Sample Travel Approval Form 70
Sample Requisition for Advance Form 71
Sample Claim of Local Conveyance Form 72
Sample Transport Requisition Form 73
Leave Policy 78
Principles and Processes for Salary Determination 79
Process of Rationalization 81
Redressal Mechanism 83
Exit Policy 84
Annexure II. Compendium of Letters 89-125
1. Dated: 19th January, 2015, Competency Based Assessment in Recruitment
of HR under NHM 89
2. Dated: 17th April, 2015, JS(P) HRMIS- OSS & Open APIs Reg 90
3. Dated: 21st April, 2015, JS(Policy) GoI or NHSRC Observers for Recruitment
Process 91
4. Dated: 3rd February, 2016, Strengthening Specialist Support in Public Health
Facilities 92
5. Dated: 8th March, 2016, Applicability of Employee Provident Fund Act, 1952 98
6. Dated: 13th June, 2016, Applying Health Systems Approach in HR under NHM 100
7. Dated: 22nd July, 2016, Remuneration of Existing DEOs to be Paid from
Lumpsum Budget 102
8. Dated: 6th December, 2016, JS(Policy) Roadmap for implementing Health
Systems Approach 103
9. Dated: 8th February, 2017, JS(Policy) Guidance Note to States on
Empanelled Recruitment 104



STNETNOC
11. Dated: 13th July, 2017, Equal Pay for Equal Work for HR under NHM 107
12. Dated: 1st March, 2018, Improving Human Resource for Health Availability
at Public Facilities 109
13. Dated: 17th May, 2018, PIP and HR Approval 110
14. Dated: 28th June, 2018, Attracting and Retaining Quality Skilled HR
under NHM 112
15. Dated: 18th December, 2018, Experience Bonus for HR under NHM 113
16. Dated: 9th January, 2019, Placement of Male MPW at HWCs 114
17. Dated: 6th March, 2019, Placement of MPW at SHCs 115
18. Dated: 4th July, 2019, Letter from Secretary (HFW) to CS All States
Strategies for HR 119
19. Dated: 2nd August, 2019, ESI Act for HR under NHM 121
20. Dated: 15th April, 2019, Minimum Performance Benchmark for
Programme Management Staff 122
21. Dated: 13th July, 2019, Reviewing the Performance Indicators with the
Programme Managers 124
Annexure III. Learnings from Other States 126-149
Promoting Better Integration of Health Information Systems: Best Practices 127
Part 1 : Human Resource Information Management System in Chhattisgarh 127
Part 2 : Swasthya Sewa Dapoon: An Integrated MIS-GIS System in Assam 128
Bringing Accountability in Health: The Madhya Pradesh Experience 130
Strengthening Human Resource for Health in Remote and Difficult Areas 132
Part 1 : Odisha’s Approach in Attracting and Retaining HR 132
Part 2 : Recruiting and Retaining Specialists and other HRH—
Bijapur Model, Chhattisgarh 133
Appraisals and Rationalization of Human Resources in NHM, Madhya Pradesh 135
Person-Centred Care through Shared leadership- Banka Model of Bihar 138
Public Health Cadre: Experience and Learning 141
Part 1 : Public Health Cadre in Maharashtra 141
Part 2 : Public Health Cadre in Odisha 142
Part 3 : Public Health Cadre in Tamil Nadu 142
AMANAT - Nurse Mobile Mentoring Programme - Bihar 144
Buddy-Buddy model of EMOC-LSAS- Uttar Pradesh 146
Paying for Performance- Odisha (P4P) 148



INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
The National Health Mission is a flagship health sector reform initiative started in 2005 as
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) and was later renamed National Health Mission (NHM)
when National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) was conceptualized as a sub mission under NHM.
The vision of NHM is: “Attainment of Universal Access to Equitable, Affordable and Quality
health care services, accountable and responsive to people’s needs, with effective inter-sectoral
convergent action to address the wider social determinants of health1”
Over the years, the NHM has initiated multiple health system reforms to strengthen primary
and secondary care. NHM is both flexible and dynamic and is intended to guide States towards
ensuring the achievement of universal access to health care through strengthening of health
systems, institutions, and capabilities. One of the objectives of the NHM is to provide access
to quality healthcare to all by reducing Out of Pocket Expenditure (OOPE) and eliminating
catastrophic health expenditures and improve utilization to minimize disparity on account of
gender, poverty, caste, other forms of social exclusion and geographical barriers.1 The NHM
adheres to the values of community engagement at all levels, flexible financing, efficient
monitoring, management and innovation.
The Core Values1 driving the National Health Mission are:
y Safeguard the health of the poor, vulnerable and disadvantaged, and move towards
a right-based approach to health through entitlements and service guarantees.
y Strengthen public health systems as a basis for universal access and social protection
against the rising costs of health care.
y Build an environment of trust between people and providers of health services.
y Empower the community to become active participants in the process of attainment
of the highest possible levels of health.
y Institutionalize transparency and accountability in all processes and mechanisms.
y Improve efficiency to optimize the use of available resources.
The National Health Mission is an umbrella programme covering over 25 programmes, focussing
1 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2014, Framework for Implementation- National Health Mission 2012-2017
www.nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/NHM/NHM_Framework_for_Implementation__08-01-2014_.pdf



NOITCUDORTNI
rural and urban areas. The scale of the programmes may vary in different States and Districts
depending on the stage of epidemiological transition/ disease burden of the region and level of
maturity of the programme implementation. To make all the programmes successful and provide
quality healthcare services that are accessible to all, it is imperative that we have adequate
number of skilled and motivated Human Resources (HR).
The innovations in governance, decentralized planning and flexible financing have enabled
many changes, including an unprecedented expansion of health workforce. The Central
government leads the formulation of guiding principles, policies and strategies based on global
evidence and provides technical assistance to the States. Health being a State subject, State
governments are responsible for implementation.
1.1. Purpose of the Guidelines
The overall Human Resources for Health (HRH), including all regular, contractual, outsourced
and any other, is a State subject. From time to time, brief directives have been issued to
assist the States regarding management of NHM HRH. However, now at the behest of the
States,consolidated guidelines are being shared only to assist States in their HRH management.
These guidelines have evolved through the practices of the last 15 years of NHM. A guideline,
that is to guide 36 States and UTs of varied population, levels of health service delivery, different
socio-cultural and economic contexts, can provide only the broad principles and guidance
which will continue to change with changing context and maturity of implementation. We will
continue to update the guidelines as the policies and processes that shape the practices of
human resources in health Sector keep evolving.
The States are encouraged to take assistance from these guidelines and adopt/adapt them as
per their population health needs, community requirements, disease burden and socio-cultural
and economic contexts.All processes, job descriptions, formats etc. given in these guidelines are
only indicative and are suggestive in nature. These guidelines come at a time when the COVID-19
pandemic has come as a reminder that management of HRH within the public Health system is
of utmost importance. We expect that the following chapters shall serve as a reference for the
States to develop a well-rounded Human Resources Policy, based on their specific context and
need.



HUMAN
RESOURCE
FOR
HEALTH
UNDER
NHM
2
Human Resource for Health
under NHM
Health workforce is one of the fundamental elements required for accelerating, achieving and
sustaining the progress of any health programme. The National Health Mission (NHM), over the
last 15 years, has added approximately 4.5 lakhs additional human resources in the country
with the aim of providing quality healthcare services to the community.
The National Health Mission supplements Human Resources for Health who are directly
engaged in healthcare service delivery as well as the ones who are engaged in administering
various programmes. Broadly, based on the nature of work, Human Resources for Health under
National Health Mission may be categorised into the following:
2.1.1. Service Delivery
This includes the staff who are directly involved in delivery of health services and are placed
at the health facilities. For example: Medical Officers/Doctors, Staff Nurses, Auxiliary Nurse
Midwives (ANMs)/ Multipurpose Health Workers (MPWs), Laboratory Technicians, Counsellors,
etc.
Service Delivery staff also includes the staff providing health care services outside of the health
facilities such as the staff of Mobile Medical Units, Rashtriya Bal SwasthyaKaryakram (RBSK) etc.
2.1.2. Programme Management (PM)2
The NHM has Programme Management Units (PMUs) to facilitate planning and implementation of
all programmes under it at National, State and District levels. All the HR placed at the Programme
Management Units and/or are engaged in performing administrative or managerial functions at
the health facilities or other associated institutions like Training institute etc. constitute the PM
Staff. They may be categorized into two broad groups:
a) Managers and Supervisors: This includes all the functionaries of Programme
Management Units (PMU) who are directly involved in planning, monitoring
and supervision of programmes such as Nodal Officers, Programme Managers,
consultants, etc.
2 Programme Management cost must not exceed 9% / 14% (for smaller NE states and UTs) of the total RE of NHM



MHN
REDNU
HTLAEH
ROF
ECRUOSER
NAMUH
the managers and supervisors such as the programme coordinators, accountants,
administrative assistant etc.
2.1.3. Support Service
The HR under support services include Data Entry Operators, support staff3 such as ward orderly,
security staff, cleaners, cook, care takers, drivers etc. To the extent possible, these are to be
engaged under NHM through outsourcing.
2.1.4. Other HR
The staff that cannot be readily categorised in the three categories i.e., service delivery,
programme management and support services are included in this category4. For example, the
trainers, Bio-Medical Engineers, Refrigerator Mechanics etc.
3 As per IPHS 2012 services of Mali, Dhobi, Waste handler, Aya, Peon, OPD Attendant, Ward Boys, Parking attendant, Plumber,
Electrician, Mistry, Vehicle drivers, Security and Sanitary workers etc. are to be through outsourcing
4 The categorization in IPHS or ISCO (International Standard Classification of Occupations) should be adhered to, so that analysis
and comparisons etc. across States as well as across countries are possible.



HRH
POLICY,
PRINCIPLES
AND
STRATEGIES
3
HRH Policy, Principles and
Strategies
HRH Policy should be guided by the overall National Health Policy, State Health Policy (if any)
and NHM framework. While the broad principles drawn from the core principles of National
Health Policy and NHM remain the same for all the States/UTs, the HRH policy and its strategies
will have to be tailor-made for each State to suit its context.
While the current guidelines have been made specifically for the NHM employees, the States
may apply the principles and processes to entire health workforce.HR policy and the strategy
cannot be only for NHM, it must be holistic and preferably for the entire sector, or at least for
the public sector. As it has to be specific to the requirement of the State, it is expected that the
States will develop HRH policy and Strategic Plan for themselves with the help of the technical
experts, including those at national level in NHM.
As these guidelines are specifically for NHM, we have adopted the NHM principles as our guiding
principles and all HRH interventions and activities shall be guided by the NHM framework
document:
3.1. Human Resource Principles in NHM
1. HR under NHM is to supplement the existing HR: regular and others who have been
engaged through other sources of funding. NHM human resources should not replace
any existing HR.
2. Human resources under NHM belong to the health system and the facilities. The HRH
is to be considered holistically in an integrated manner and never in programmatic
verticals.
3. Under NHM in a state, there should be parity in salary. Salaries for similar
qualifications, skills, and workload should be fixed keeping in view the experience
and length of service. Inter-state comparison is not possible because of unequal
labour market conditions.
4. All required labour laws, pertinent regulations of the land and rules, including
minimum wages act and equal opportunity for employment are to be followed by all
the States/SHS.



SEIGETARTS
DNA
SELPICNIRP
,YCILOP
HRH
and case load.
6. Efforts should be made to place HR effectively using the concept of rational placement
and towards increasing the efficiency along with sustained quality. States/SHS are to
provide supportive supervision and mentoring for capacity building.
7. Local recruitment criteria should be adopted and preferably there should not usually
be any concept of transfer under NHM5.
8. Decentralized recruitment, wherever feasible, should be preferred but there should
be no compromise on the quality of skilled HR. Competency-based skill test for front
line workers is mandatory.
9. Ensure motivation for the human resources by recognition, reward, and work towards
finding the fit between the job description and the job holder.
10. States must encourage learning and promote an environment of respect and dignity
at the workplace for employees, management, programme beneficiaries and other
stakeholders alike.
11. Professionalize the management of human resources. HR practices must be
implemented in a way that the workforce perceives them to be fair. Move from mere
administration and establishment to development of human resources.
3.2. Key Strategies
Some key strategies applicable to all States /SHS include:
• Ensure availability of HR by creating adequate number of regular posts as per the
IPHS in the long run and using NHM posts in the short to medium term to fill critical
gaps.
• Address shortages of skilled workers in remote, rural areas and other under-served
pockets through appropriate monetary (differential salaries and allowances) and
non-monetary incentives.
• Ensure that personnel looking after Human Resource Management of HRH are
trained in human resources, organization behaviour etc./ are specialised in the field.
• Establish special recruitment board to streamline and fast-track the recruitments in
public health system, including in the Health department and in the NHM.
• Reward performance through recognition and Performance based Incentives (PBI)
for individual and teams as per the framework developed by the State based on
contextual customisation of the norms given from the national level from time to time.
• Establish Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) for better
planning and quality monitoring.
• Create Specialist Cadre (if not already in place) to strengthen the secondary care.
• Create Public Health Cadre to strengthen primary care.
• Strengthen Programme Management Units and create institutional structures to
ensure better coordination between the Directorates and the NHM and develop
appropriate programme management capacities.
5 Preference may be given to the existing NHM staff with requisite qualification and experience in case s/he applies for any post
in other District/ Block as there could be a personal reason for relocation.



HRH
POLICY,
PRINCIPLES
AND
STRATEGIES
improving training systems to maintain the continuum of enhancement in skills and
knowledge of the workforce.
• Undertake long term futuristic human resource planning, taking into consideration
the demography, disease burden, and expected case load in the facilities.
Over the years of NHM implementation, the MoHFW and States have agreed to abide by some
norms which govern the management of human resources of NHM on day to day/ year to year
basis. These guidelines are the collation of directives sent earlier and have been developed
based on discussions that have taken place in various meetings over the last few years. As HRH
policy and strategy are state-specific and may take some time to develop, these guidelines in
the meanwhile will help the States streamline, tackle and manage the human resources under
NHM.
Note: All HR related policies of the State, including relating to code of conduct, sexual harassment,
Workplace violence, Grievance Redressal etc. must be made available in public domain through
NHM/State Health Department Website.



MHN
REDNU
TNEMEGAGNE
FO
SEDOM
4
Modes of Engagement under
NHM
The engagements under NHM are mostly contractual. They are essentially to make the deficient
skills and human resources available to the government system. Based on the duration, and
the primary agency which engages the HR, the engagements under NHM could be broadly
categorised into following:
4.1. Engagement of Staff on Contractual Basis
The recruitment of staff in NHM at the State/District level, in general, is on a fixed tenure (contract)
basis. The primary agency in such cases is the State Health Society (SHS) or the District Health
Society (DHS). The duration of the contract could be for three years at a time or till the age of
retirement (as has been done by a few States namely, Bihar). The year-to-year continuation
would be based on the performance of the individual and availability of the funding under NHM.
The States should make sure that all appointments are done through competent authority,
against the set requirement, with formal contracts detailing all the roles and responsibilities,
performance benchmarks as well as terms and conditions of the engagement with the NHM.
4.2. Engagement through Outsourcing
The IPHS and the National Health Mission encourages the engagement of HR for support
services (such as data entry, cleaning, security etc. where the staff is either semi-skilled or
unskilled) on outsourcing basis. This helps in reducing the burden of recruitment of personnel
for such services. The SHS however must ensure that the staff engaged through outsourcing are
paid at least the minimum wages and all benefits as per the extant laws such as PF and ESI etc.
The selection of the agency should be based on the efficiency of services, quality of people,
and lower service charges for the agency butnot at the cost of salaries of the outsourced staff
engaged.
Some States have also engaged most of the Human Resources through outsourcing to do
away with the hassles of recruiting and managing Human Resources. This should not become
a common practice in case of service delivery HR. However, if this is the case, the agency
engaging the HR is the employer and not the SHS/DHFW. While the suitability of the mode of
engagement depends on the context, the State must protect the human resources from any



MODES
OF
ENGAGEMENT
UNDER
NHM
worked well in case of staff nurses.
4.3. Engagement through Deputation
When recruiting for any position, especially in programme management, where a specialized
technical and thematic role is to be performed, the existing government employees may also
be allowed to apply. If such candidates fulfil the requirement of the posts, they will be placed
directly on the shortlist but will still go through the same formal selection process applicable
to all other applicants. Finance is one such area where regular cadre officers with requisite
qualifications and experience of handling financial matters have proven useful in NHM.
The ‘deputation to SHS’ is considered as any other case of deputation outside parent department
and if required NHM pays for the salary and associated benefits. The parent department remains
the original employer, and services are taken by the SHS.
The deputation process is annexed with the document.
4.4. Engagement of Interns/Fellows
If the SHS so intends, it can engage interns (for a period of 1month to 1 year) or fellows (for
a period of 1 year), who would work dedicatedly on a subject/ topic of their internship under
the guidance of the programme officer concerned. The topic chosen should be such that it is
mutually beneficial, for the intern as well as the programme. Interns could be given a nominal
stipend or could be engaged free. In cases where stipend is paid, the SHS should follow a
selection process to choose the right intern/fellow(Refer Section 5.3.4.).
4.5. Engagement of Retired Government Officials
There is also the provision of engaging retired officials for consultancy services under the NHM
where their specific technical skills and strengths are required. In such cases, the services of
the retired officials are generally till the date they attain the age of 65. Instead of having such
posts under NHM, it is desirable that the retired officials be given assignments with milestones to
achieve in specific cases as required by the programme or SHS. However, hiring retired human
resources on a routine basis and without any particular technical area should be avoided.
The total monthly consolidated fee and the pension drawn by the consultant should be decided
as per the HR Policy of the State (usually pay minus pension and not more than the last pay
drawn by official, calculated at the current rates of Dearness Allowance).
4.6. Engagement of HR through Partner Agencies
In cases where a programme is to be implemented by any partner agency at initial stages and
is later to be handed over to the Department of Health for further implementation or rolling
out, a standard contracting guideline should be prepared. It should detail the conditions in
case of any possibility for any subsequent engagement of HR through the NHM. This would
ensure sustainability as terms ofengagement of various partners may vary from that of NHM.
Remuneration of HR should be carefully decided keeping in view the financial implications at
the time of transition, e.g., e-VIN staff.



MHN
REDNU
TNEMEGAGNE
FO
SEDOM
There could be engagements that are on per case basis, per session basis, or where the HR is
contracted-in on special terms or the services are contracted out (in cases where infrastructure
required is not available in the public health facilities but is available in private non-profit
or for-profit institutions), along with the requisite skilled HR. E.g., engagement of specialists,
engagement of auditors, legal experts etc. NHM provides the flexibility to the SHS to engage
the requisite skilled HR by all the modes possible, provided it helps to further the goals of NHM/
NHP.



RECRUITMENT
5
Recruitment
As the National Health Mission is expected to help the States supplement their existing Human
Resources for Health, the recruitment by SHS/DHS should ensure transparency, speed, and
quality. Recruitment must be based on merit and should take into consideration the required
skill, knowledge, qualifications and demonstrated experience.
Recruitment should be the responsibility of the Human Resource Cell. The necessity of the position,
budget availability and approval from the competent authority should be ensured before the
recruitment process is initiated. In the NHM, all posts and budget approved are mentioned in the
Record of Proceedings (RoP) of the meeting of National Programme Co-ordination Committee
(NPCC). The HR Cell should ensure that all recruitment and overall number of personnel are
within the prevailing budgetary norms, structure and ratios. The time taken from the identification
of vacancy to the announcement of results should not be more than 45-60 days. The States with
good and robust HRH practices do it routinely, run about 4 rounds of recruitment drive in a year
and do not have more than 10% of vacancy at any given point of time.
5.1. Bodies Conducting Recruitment
Ideally the recruitment of NHM HR should follow the same procedure followed for the recruitment
of regular cadre and should be carried out by the same organization/ institution/ body that
administers regular cadre appointments. Generally, the regular cadre recruitments for gazetted
officers are carried out by the State Public Service Commission (PSC).However, as the PSC has
the load of all the departments, the recruitment cycle in most cases is exceedingly long, ranging
from 1.5 Years to 3 or more years. To overcome this problem, some of the States such as Tamil
Nadu and Haryana have constituted a separate Recruitment Board for Health. The board takes
care of both the regular as well as the contractual recruitment for all health cadres. All the
States are encouraged to establish such a board. Meanwhile, the State Health Society may
conduct recruitment under the NHM as per its norms approved by the Governing Body or as per
its by-laws.
While more specialized recruitments are done at the State level, NHM gives flexibility for
decentralization of recruitment. Any recruitment, as per the district’s requirement and capacity
could be conducted at the district level following the laid down processes. Local decentralized
recruitments are faster and better in the cases of specialists through walk-in Interviews and



TNEMTIURCER
medical college or a nursing school in the district makes it easier for the district to recruit the
passing out students.
State may determine as to which posts could be recruited by the districts, based on their capacity
to undertake the recruitment processes. The HR cell should support and monitor the process
even if the recruitment is delegated to the district. While the responsibility can be delegated, the
accountability remains with the State.
To enable speedy and professional recruitment, the State or district may use the empanelled
Recruitment agencies of MoHFW or empanel their own agencies6. These agencies would
carry out the recruitment up to the interview as per the State’s/District’s directions. While the
responsibility can be delegated, the accountability remains with the State.
5.2. Recruitment Committee
In order to bring objectivity in recruitment, there should be a provision of recruitment Committee
to guide the matters of recruitment. The committee could be of 3-5 members depending on
the strength of SHS and should be drawn from HR cell and programme divisions and may be
rotated each year. The committee should ideally have a provision to invite a member from the
programme division whose recruitment drive is on the anvil. Such a provision should be kept
even in cases where the recruitment is through a recruitment board.
5.3. Process of Recruitment
The recruitment process should be relevant, aptitude/ skill-based, transparentand equitable. It
should be applied consistently to all candidates.
The key steps in the process of recruitment are shown in Exhibit 1 and explained below:
Exhibit 1: Key steps in the Process of Recruitment
Design and Disseminate
Identify and validate Review Job
Advertisement for
vacancies. Description
vacancy
Decide on stages of
Proceed through all Review CVs and
selection and special
selection stages. shortlist applications
weightage criteria, if any.
Reference check of Disseminate result and
selected candidates issue offerletter.
5.3.1. Identification and Validation of Vacancies
A systematic process to identify vacancies and requirement of HRH should be periodically
undertaken, ideally once in every quarter. Potential transfers, promotions, retirements and
6 Refer: Annexure 2: Compendium of Letters ‘Dated: February 8th, 2017, JS(Policy) Guidance note to States on empanelled recruitment’
http://nhm.gov.in/New_Updates_2018/Om_and_orders/HR/D_O_JS_(Policy)_dt_8th_Feb_2017_Guidance_note_to_States_
on_empanelled_recruitment_agencies_20.pdf



RECRUITMENT
Management Information System (HRMIS) and an HRH strategic plan make the process of
identification of posts evidence based and smooth.
5.3.2. Review Job Description (JD) / Terms of Reference (ToR)
Any position created under National Health Mission should have clearly defined roles and
responsibilities along with measurable deliverables. A job description or ToR defines the key
responsibilities, requirement and qualifications for a specific position and creates a benchmark
for performance review. A detailed job description (JD) of all staff should always be available
with the HR Cell. However, prior to any recruitment, the JD/ ToR should be reviewed by the HR
Cell and the programme division (if associated) as the specific requirements of the same position
may change over time depending on the phase of the programme, changed disease burden or
needs of the health system in general. The most recent guidelines of the programme should be
referred. In case of any confusion, the State should get in touch with the Division in MoHFW or
HRH team in NHSRC.
Any preferential qualifications or experience required for a certain position may be added to the
ToR. This is to be done where some specific qualification or relevant experience is expected to
equip the candidates to do a better job in that specific role. For example, an additional degree in
finance may be desirable for the role of Programme Manager or prior experience at district level
may be desirable for a state level position or an additional course on critical care by an MBBS
Doctor may prove more useful if the post is for Emergency services.
The reviewed JD/ToR should then be again approved by the competent authority as per
the HR Policy of the State. The process of designing Job Description/ToRand a few sample
ToRsareannexed for reference. At this stage, the approved ToR can be handed over to the
recruitment agency, in case the State is engaging any, to carry out the recruitment.
5.3.3. Advertisement for Vacancy
A precise and clear job advertisement is essential to attract the right people for the job.
The advertisement should evoke interest and a desire to work with the National Health
Missionamong the prospective talent pool. It should clearly mention the Job Position/title, JD/
ToR, salary, application fee (if any), details of application form to be submitted, last date and
time of submission, mode of submission, address and all other relevant details including the
reservation norms followed in the State. The State should develop a standardized application
format where the relevant parts as applicable to the post could be filled by the candidates. As
the internet facilities and ability to use it are still uneven in the country, the State should ideally
give the option of filling the application form online and send soft-copy or hard copy through
registered post/speed post/courier- as is convenient to the applicant.
A short advertisement should be published in one National English and two leading local
newspapers (State / District's Local Language) with the details of the website and its links. The
detailed online version of the advertisement should be put on NHM National / State / District and
Health Department website along with other relevant job portals. The State may also circulate
the digital advertisement and the web link on social media. The advertisement must remain in
public domain for at least 15 days or more for its proper dissemination and give adequate time
for the applicants to apply.
The HR Cell or the agency (as is the case) should be responsible for coordinating the process
of receiving, collecting, and managing the applications. It must be ensured that the applications
are date-stamped, numbered and filed properly- both in physical format and online database.



TNEMTIURCER
It is essential to identify the pertinent stages of selection for the specific post/position. This
ensures that people with desired knowledge, skills and competencies are hired. The Stages
should ideally be pre-determined for each category of HR. However, any fine tuning, if at all
required, must be done by the HR Cell before the last date of submission of applications.
Depending on the job position, multiple stages of selection may ensue, ranging from written test,
skill test, computer proficiency test to personal interview. Different weightage may be given to
different selection stages as per the skills and competencies required for the job. The following
exhibit shows some commonly used stages of selection for service delivery, programme
management and technical experts engaged in NHM.
Exhibit 2: Some of the common Stages of Selection
Stages Service Delivery Programme Technical Experts/ Master Trainers/
Management senior posts
Written Test √ √ √
Skill Test √
Computer Proficiency √
Group Discussion √
Presentation √ √
Personal/ Panel Interview √ √ √
Details on some stages of selection have been annexed for reference. States may also consider
existing national or state level reputed entrance examinations such as PG NEET for selection in
NHM. While the State is free to choose the pertinent technique/tool to assess the candidates, a
competency-based skill test for service delivery staff, especially the ones who are to serve as
frontline workers, must be conducted.
The Stage of Written examination may not be required in case of specialists where the number
of candidates are less and available posts/ vacancies are more.
5.3.5. Review CVs and Shortlist Applications
Usually, the first step is to screen the ineligible applications. The shortlisting criteria for the
applications should be developed as per the requirements mentioned in the advertisement along
with the reservation norms applicable in the State / District. This would prune-out ineligible and
below par applications.
The list of shortlisted candidates should be put on the State/district website as well as the SHS/
DHS office. The candidates should be informed by email and other appropriate means about
the selection process, date and timings.
5.3.6. Proceed through the Selection Stages
Candidates should be selected on the basis of the pre-determined criteria. The core team of
recruiters and interviewers should be well trained in transparent selection procedures.
The ratio of applicants shortlisted to the number of posts vacant depend on many factors and
an informed decision must be taken for the same. In cases where there are lot of applicants,
especially in service delivery the screening should be strictly based on competence and skills.


#### [Table Content]
| Stages | Service Delivery | Programme Management | Technical Experts/ Master Trainers/ senior posts |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Written Test | √ | √ | √ |
| Skill Test | √ |  |  |
| Computer Proficiency |  | √ |  |
| Group Discussion |  | √ |  |
| Presentation |  | √ | √ |
| Personal/ Panel Interview | √ | √ | √ |




RECRUITMENT
should be selected. The HR cell should try to anticipate the number of likely applicants and
make adequate provisions in the advertisement as well as the selection process to choose the
best. If need be and if there are more candidates with higher qualifications who are better skilled
and competent, priority could be given to better qualified candidates.
In case of specialists and super specialists (if any), there are not many applicants and hence
having a fixed ratio in these cases may not be possible.
In case of programme management posts, more caution must be taken as not only the posts
are limited but since most programme management incumbents are responsible for supervising
others, the selection has to be such that along with technical skills, capacity to manage, and
proven experience of delivering expected results are also assessed.
In case of qualifications such as MBA or MPH or Health Management, there are good number of
applications. In such cases, if the basic criteria are met, the applicants shortlisted to posts ratio
could be kept at 5:1*7.
In cases of programme management posts that are heads of division and may require higher
qualifications and much more experience, a minimum ratio of 3:1* should be aimed. In case of
single applicant for a crucial post, it is better to readvertise.However, this clause should not be
applied to specialists and super specialists as their availability is limited.
The final candidature should be established based on cumulative assessment score as per the
weightage from all the stages of selection.
As the last step in selection, the documents and certificates submitted by the candidate as proof
of the qualifications and experience should be verified. It can also be done by an outsourced
agency, which should co-ordinate with the university /institutions to get it verified. However,
selection result could be declared even if document verification is pending with the condition
that selection will remain valid only if the documents are found correct during the verification.
5.3.7. Reference Check
Once the final list of candidates is prepared, a reference check may be carried out before the
final job offer is made. All candidates at the final stage of selection should be asked to provide
contact details of two or three professional references not related to them.
These references should be contacted by the HR Cell to enquire about factors such as workplace
behaviour, reasons for leaving, health matters, any disciplinary proceedings etc. regarding the
selected candidates. A reference check ensures that the selected candidates are competent
enough and can adjust well in their new workplace.
Note: It is imperative that reference check be carried out for all supervisory posts.
5.3.8. Final Result and its Dissemination
After necessary referral checks, the final results should be submitted to the competent authority
to seek approval for its public release. The results should be published in the SHS/ DHS website
and health department portals in which the advertisement had been published.
All selected candidates should also be sent an official email, requesting them to complete
the joining formalities and convey their joining date along with a copy of the offer letter for
*7 Only suggestive, based on expert opinion and large-scale recruitments



TNEMTIURCER
final results have been published and put on the website.
A detailed list of contents of Offer letter in annexed for reference.
Waiting List: A Waiting lists should be kept which should remain valid for a period of one year
after the result has been declared. Waitlists are useful in finding substitutes and avoiding delays/
additional costs in case the successful candidate is not able to join.



APPOINTMENT
AND
ONBOARDING
6
Appointment and Onboarding
6.1. Joining Formalities
The formalities and the processes of appointment and onboarding should be simple and make
the incumbent feel welcome. The aim should be to provide adequate information to make their
work and assimilation in the team easy.
6.1.1. Appointment / Offer Letter
On the day of joining, the new employees should get the original appointment letter (of the
same offer letter that had been sent on email after selection). The appointment letter should
then be signed by the employee and the employer (SHS/DHS). The original copy of the letter
should be handed over to the employee and a copy should remain with the employer. The
appointment/ offer letter must include the designation of the post, place and date of joining,
details of reporting officer, duration of the contract, remuneration/ honorarium offered (including
information about tax deduction) and TA / DA as applicable. The contents of the contract along
with a model contract are annexed for reference.
Ideally the HR cell should develop a set of documents and forms as a joining kit. The kit should
have a checklist for joining that should be fulfilled by the HR cell and once all the activities are
completed, the checklist should be signed by the HR cell, the appointee/ incumbent, and the
supervisor.
Documents for Verification
It is imperative that all required documents (including address proof) of the candidates are
collected and sent for verification on the day of joining.
Personal Details, Bank Account and Email Id
The employee details should preferably be uploaded on the Human Resource Management
Information System. The bank account details etc. should be taken, and the employee may be
registered on PFMS for salary purposes.



GNIDRAOBNO
DNA
TNEMTNIOPPA
communication (if applicable and in use).
The new employee should be introduced by someone from the HR cell to her/his immediate
team members. The new employee should also be shown the designated workstation.
6.1.2. Issuance of Identity Card
An Identity Card should be issued to the new employee. Along with name, designation,
photograph, it should also have blood group and emergency contact number.
In case of misplaced or stolen I-card, information should be registered at Police Station and such
information should also be shared with the issuing office.
6.1.3. Attendance
The new employee should be registered on the biometric-based attendance system (or the
manual system). The attendance should be linked with the monthly salary preparation of the
employee.
6.2. Orientation
New recruits should get a brief orientation to their new workplace and the organization. This
helps in acclimatizing them to the new team, the work being done at the new organization and
the expectations to be met.
A peer-mentor or a buddy may be provided to the new recruits for a specific time-period to get
them settled in their new role.
A structured induction or orientation programme of half a day or one day must be provided
to the new employee within a month of joining. Induction should cover all three aspects: 1.
administrative rules and processes, 2. overall induction to NHM and SHS/DHS,3. programme or
role specific induction.
6.3. Probation
All employees engaged with the SHS/DHS remain on probation for a period of three months,
which may be further extended for another three months, if needed. The same should be
conveyed to the new employees on their day of joining (along with the written intimation on the
appointment/offer letter).
Confirmation after the probation period remains at the discretion of the SHS/DHS, based on the
performance review done by the immediate supervisor and verified by the HR cell. The HR Cell
must ensure that all probationers get a letter of confirmation or of extension of probation(as the
case may be) at the end of the probation period.
The probation period may or may not be applicable for the short-term consultancy positions of
less than a year.



CAPACITY
BUILDING/CAPACITY
DEVELOPMENT
7
Capacity Building/Capacity
Development
Emerging health needs determine the Health System priorities. Therefore, to respond to the
ever-evolving requisites of the system, skills and knowledge of HRH need regular upgradation.
Capacity Development aims to enhance the existing skills and knowledge in a way that helps
the organization and the Mission achieve their goal through the human resources.
Capacity development inter alia includes all types of orientation and trainings, improvement in
institutional processes and its management. Here we will focus on the training part.
In the NHM we primarily require 4 types of training programmes viz. induction/orientation
training, in-service skill development training, programme-related skill enhancement and
training, including multiskilling. Training not only improves the productivity and efficiency of
the organisation but also enables employees to perform their role more effectively, acquire
additional skills, in turn facilitating their career advancement as well.
7.1.1. Induction Training
Induction training helps employees understand their roles and expected contribution at their
workplace. The induction programme should be an informative and enriching experience for
the new incumbent, helping them understand the culture of the organisation. The employees
should be sensitized about the health challenges of the State/District and the various population
groups and stakeholders, especially the vulnerable sections of society. Employees of NHM
should have an empathetic approach towards addressing these challenges.
The induction training could be of three to five days at a stretch, encompassing knowledge
dissemination regarding NHM, its programmes and, administrative and financial processes. It
is expected that by the end of the induction training programme, the employees shall have a
good working understanding of the health system and overall dynamics of working within the
organization, including its culture, communication processes, both external and internal, work
environment and its beneficiaries.
While the overall responsibility of initiating the induction training would be of the State HR cell,
depending on the recruiting body and the place of posting, others (e.g., DHS or Regional teams
etc) would also contribute. An example of an induction schedule for M&E Officer is annexed for
reference.



TNEMPOLEVED
YTICAPAC/GNIDLIUB
YTICAPAC
Apart from the knowledge and skills acquired during pre-service training, there should be a
systematic programme of in-service training to update/ upgrade the skills of the staff so that
they provide quality health services to the public. It also helps to better equip them to deliver
their specific roles and responsibilities in their current position. Ideally the skill training should
be undertaken after the employee has undergone competency- based skill test. There could be
refresher courses or additional training to reorient and revise the set of skills. Wherever possible,
this should be accompanied by a mechanism for supportive supervision and mentorship so that
employees feel adequately supported.
The duration of in-service training could vary from cadre to cadre. While a simpler knowledge-
based training could take only one to three days, more technical skill-based training could take
weeks, such as Skill Birth Attendant (SBA) training for three weeks, Emergency Obstetric and
Neonatal care (EmONC) training for 16 weeks etc.
7.1.3. Programmatic Training
These training programmes will be designed and scheduled by the programme divisions at the
State level with the help of SIHFW, SHSRC, development partners, regional and District teams
primarily using the MoHFW guidelines contextualised to suit the State requirements. These
training programmes will train the programme managers and service delivery human resources
in new programme, as well as to update the knowledge about the existing programmes and any
changes in those programmes.
7.1.4. Skill Enhancement Training
In addition to the previous three kinds of training programmes, there should be many training
programmes for employees at each level for enhancement of their skills. These programmes
should be available to the employees on a choice basis, and information on all available training
programmes, its duration, timing, place, and institute/organization offering the training should be
made available by the HR cell at the beginning of the financial years.
Skill enhancement training would include multiskilling training such as EmONC, Life Saving
Anaesthesia Skills(LSAS), New born and Child Health, which are of longer duration and may
result in new posting at CHC or higher-level institutions. Application from the employee/doctors
for such training along with consent to be posted to new institution (if required) should be
obtained before the training.
A few training programmes for each level should ideally be linked to performance and be
available on demand to those employees who have performed well on the job and want to
further improve their performance. The HR Cell should develop the process and details
regarding the same. At a minimum, 5-day training/seminar, with a training fee of Rs.10,000/-(TA/
DA, accommodation charges extra) for a training relevant to their work area should be allowed.
7.2. Nodal Agency/Apex Body for Capacity Building
Capacity Building/ training is a continuous process and requires robust mechanisms and
institutions for its design and implementation. An apex body for training should be identified at
the State level. Ideally a strengthened and vibrant SIHFW should be looking after the training.
In case it is not possible, State must identify any equivalent body(e.g., SHSRC). The Apex body
should then identify training sites and nodal centres in all the Districts of the State.



CAPACITY
BUILDING/CAPACITY
DEVELOPMENT
district. Residential arrangements and transport facilities for field visits should be provided.
Other allowances including TA/DA for training should be provided as per the State norms and
policy and, should be similar across all programmes.
The Apex Body should undertake regular assessments of all trainings programmes that
have been conducted to evaluate their efficacy (pre and post training assessments) as well
as effectiveness (evaluation of actual practice in the field) and review them for any course
corrections.
7.3. Training Management
To establish a well-equipped training mechanism, state should develop an annual training plan
using Training Needs Assessment process and subsequently publish a training calendar. The
process of undertaking Training Needs Assessment is annexed for reference.
At each stage all available training programmes, skills/knowledge they impart, duration, timing
and institutions/ places where they are available, should be mentioned by the SHS. All the
employees who are in the A+ or A category in their appraisal should be awarded with at least
one training programme of their choice.
The training planned and undergone by an employee should be synchronised with the
comprehensive Human Resources Management Information System to create a database for
training requirements/ schedules of all employees. As and when the training programmes get
completed, such a database should facilitate identification of HRH who have undertaken a
particular type of training. It should provide clear indication of which trainings each employee
has undergone along with the total number of HRH who undertook a particular training. This
shall provide a complete progress report of trainings at all levels. No separate TMIS (Training
management Information System) should be run. It must be a module of HRMIS.
A database of identified master trainers should also be prepared within the HRMIS so that they
can be called upon to deliver training programmes as per the annual schedule. If there is a paucity
of trainers within the state, external consultants may be contracted, or an external agency may
be hired to conduct the training in accordance with pre-agreed criteria and guidelines.
The SHS must be ready to build and develop the capacities of its human resources, provide
mentoring and supportive supervision wherever required.
7.4. Training Material
It must be made sure that employees get easy access to videos/ modules of trainings conducted
for future references as well. All the training material can be made readily available through the
State NHM Website.



TNEMEGANAM
EEYOLPME
8
Employee Management
Employee management begins with the joining of the employee and continues throughout the
entire work life of an employee within the organization.
8.1. Contract Management
Contract Management is crucial for smooth management of Human Resources in any
organisation. Contract Management has to be done from the moment an employee joins the
NHM till the time s/he leaves as per the NHM Policy of extension/termination or voluntary basis.
It should aim at protecting the rights of the organization as well as the employee and make
the conditions of the job and job responsibilities clear. Contracts need tobe altered and signed
afresh if any clause or job responsibility is changed during engagement.
In NHM, the SHS /DHS can give a three years’ contract. The contract renewal is based on annual
performance appraisal (refer section 8.2.). Some States have assured job till the retirement age
(generally 60 Years) for the NHM employees, provided they continue performing well at their
job.
8.2. Performance Appraisal
Performance appraisal process is an essential part of Human Resource Management in terms
of assessing the improvement in skill, knowledge, ability and overall performance of the staff.
All staff under NHM should undergo performance appraisal annually/ biannually and the State
should develop assessment and grading mechanism to provide objectivity to the assessment
process.
At the minimum, States must appraise and track the performance as per the minimum performance
benchmarks shared by MoHFW. Those who do not reach the minimum benchmarks should be
asked for explanation and if in next 6 months their performance does not improve, their contract
may not be extended. Odisha has added a clause that such employees will not be eligible to
apply for any post under NHM for the next 2 years.
Beyond the contract extension on fulfilment of the minimum performance benchmarks, States
should also incentivise good performance of the employees with higher increments.



EMPLOYEE
MANAGEMENT
0 to 15% based on the State policy, the SHS/State could also make provisions for performance-
based incentives. States should have a good framework and robust monitoring mechanism to
monitor the performance in order to institute a performance -based incentive that is fair to all.
Process of performance appraisal under NHM is annexed for reference.
8.2.1. Rewards and Recognition
The HRH division of NHM should come up with ideas to recognize and reward the employees
for their good performance and contribution to the mission.
The reward need not be monetary. Non-monetary incentives like recognition of good work in
annual meetings, a letter of recognition/commendation by the Mission Director or sending the
employees for exposure visit or training in their work area could motivate the employees.
For outstanding performance, the programme team or an entire unit or the facility team could
be recognized and rewarded. A token amount could also be given for organizing a small team
get-together.
8.3. Expenses Policy
The Expenses Policy should be based on the state specific policy or as per the decision approved
by the Executive Committee and Governing Body of the State Health Mission. Specifications
related to travel and utility reimbursements are provided in the annexure along with the process
of claiming expenses.
8.4. Leave Policy
The State NHM leave policy should be applicable to all NHM Staff. If the state NHM has not
adopted any leave policy, it may adopt the leave policy of its Health and Family Welfare
department.
Maternity and Paternity Leave, and benefits for NHM employees should be commensurate with
the policy followed for departmental employees of the State.
Leave application form and approval procedure is annexed for reference.
8.4.1. Public Holidays
The fixed gazetted and restricted holiday list for the calendar year would be circulated to all
staff members at the beginning of the year and will be available on demand from the HR Cell
of NHM.
8.5. Employee Welfare
The States should take measures to develop innovative mechanisms to ensure that the
employees have a vibrant, motivating, supportive and safe working environment- both physically
and mentally- that can help improve employee morale and productivity by reducing stress, job
burnout, and absenteeism.
The States may explore the idea of introducing cafeteria/ recreational room and regular
access tocounselling sessions for encouraging sound mental health for all HRH. An annual get



TNEMEGANAM
EEYOLPME
interaction and bonding should be encouraged.
8.5.1. Occupational Health, Stress Management and Employee Safety
The health and safety of the workforce should be of vital concern to the management. Effective
plans have been demonstrated to reduce the number and severity of work-related injuries and
illnesses.
Facility In-Charge/ head of the organization should take adequate steps to:
• Identify health and safety risks and ensure that the health and safety plan is relevant
to the needs of the facility
• Develop hazard prevention (including fire, biomedical and chemical hazard) and
control to reduce the number of hazards in the facility.
• Ensure supply and availability of appropriate personal protective equipment.
• Records of all staff work-related injuries must be kept.
• Train and educate (new and current personnel) and designate specific staff to
undertake responsibility for overseeing work safety and health policies and their
implementation.
8.5.2. Living Quarters
The States should make sure that living quarters/lodging facilities are provided to the HRH,
especially in rural and difficult areas, close to the health facilities. The State may also explore
the option of providing creche facilities for women working with the NHM in the Block/District/
State offices.
8.6. Compensation/Salaries and other Benefits
8.6.1. Compensation/salaries and Increments
Salaries under the National Health Mission (NHM) should facilitate attraction and retention of
talent and therefore offering competitive salaries is important to attract qualified HRH, motivate
the existing staff and reduce turnover. The salary disbursement process of the NHM Staff should
be carried out through the Human Resources Management Information System (HRMIS) in an
automated manner.
Principles and processes for salary determination and annual increments are annexed for
reference.
Note: In the Record of Proceedings (ROP), in principle 5% of the total HR budget is approved as
lump sum for increment. The increment for individual staff is to be decided by the State. It may
range from 0% to 10% and should be linked to performance appraisal process.
The annual increment may be a maximum of 15% in case the State is undertaking HR
Rationalization.
Rationalization of compensation should be undertaken, wherever required. The process of
rationalisation is annexed for consideration.



EMPLOYEE
MANAGEMENT
Hardship Allowance
The State may decide to divide its area into categories based on the level of difficulty in
providing healthcare services and provide differential salary or allowance to motivate staff for
serving in these difficult areas for a fixed tenure. For example, based on the level and nature of
difficulty, Odisha has categorised all its health institutions into 5 types from V0 to V48 , taking
into consideration their vulnerability status. Place-based incentives are provided to the HRH
based on the category in which the particular health institution falls. Such differential incentive
system can be adopted by other states.
Ultimately, the definition of ‘hardship’ should be contextualized by each state as per their
specific conditions, including but not limited to factors such as physical geography, political or
civil unrest, disaster prone conditions, availability of good housing, schools etc.
Note: States may also identify about 10-20% facilities/places that are most difficult to access
and offer a fixed tenure posting for 2-3 years, after which staff can be posted for at least 3 years
in their chosen place and facility. It would be preferable to mention the date of relieving from the
hard posting and the next place of posting to their chosen facility in the initial posting/transfer
order itself, thereby generating confidence in the adherence to this policy and assuring staff of
their fixed tenure in difficult/hard areas.
Incentives
Performance-based incentives may also be designed and implemented by the State keeping
in mind the long-term sustainability of contractual staff. These should be closely monitored
and evaluated at regular intervals. The incentives could be designed in two ways – individual
performance-based or team performance-based.
Performance-based incentives should be linked to a robust appraisal system. States should
develop specific, measurable, realistic and time-bound key performance indicators to assess
the performance of the HRH. The indicators must be valid, attainable and relevant.
In some states, employees are nominated for advance trainings or specialized training courses
related to the programme they are working with. We may add these as one of the possible ways
of promoting retention.
Experience Bonus
Employees may become eligible for experience bonus after completion of either 3 years or 5
years of service under NHM. Regarding experience bonus, please refer to ASMD’s letter (DO. NO:
Z-18015/23/2018-NHM-II-Part 1) dated 18 December 2018 (annexed in Compendium of Letters).
Other Benefits
Apart from salaries, allowances and incentives, some States have also made provisions for
accidental and life insurance. It is mostly done either by including NHM employees in the State
insurance scheme or making a corpus or paying a part of the insurance premium.
During the COVID pandemic, frontline workers were covered under the Pradhan Mantri Garib
Kalyan Package: Insurance Scheme for Health Workers Fighting COVID-19.
8 Place Based Incentive.pdf (dhsodisha.nic.in)



TNEMEGANAM
EEYOLPME
Hospitals once a year.
8.7. Posting and Transfer
Under the NHM, recruitment is done for a particular position at the State, Division, District or
Block level, and it could be at a Health Service delivery institution or at the State apex body.
The employees should be given the choice of their posting to the extent possible. Only if there
is no vacancy, should the nearby district choice or second choice be given. In case of healthcare
providers, the husband and wife should be co-located or as near each other to the extent
possible and any other family members maybe given preferential posting in the same district
and if possible same block.
NHM employees should not be subjected to any routine transfers. Transfers may be entertained
in certain exceptional circumstances such as spousal colocation and mutual transfer where
both the employees at same level or the job that requires same educational qualifications
want the transfers because of personal/family reasons. Another exception could be transferring
an employee to a post which is vacant because the employee so desires because of family/
personal reasons.
Note: While considering the mutual transfer of specialists, it should be ensured that there is no
mismatch of specializations and no irrational deployment as a result of such transfers.
8.7.1. Career Progression
In NHM, any person having the requisite qualification can apply for higher level posts and be
selected for it. NHM staff should ideally be given weightage of marks (up to 25%) for the jobs
within health department as they are well-versed with the nature of work, organizational culture
and the Mission. In many States, block level managers have progressed by becoming district
and regional managers and reached the level of State managers.
States should also consider recognition and promotion for exceptional employees, and the EC
and GB of the SHS may deliberate on such promotions for its approval. It may not become a
routine affair but it is good to have such a provision.
Career advancement tracks for all cadres of employees should be available so that employees
are aware of the options available to them with the NHM/health department.
8.8. Grievance Redressal Policy and Procedure
NHM recognises the right of its employees to express their grievances and seek solutions
concerning disagreements arising from working relationships, working conditions, employment
practices or differences of interpretation of policy etc. that might arise between the management
and the employees.
A Grievance Redressal Committee shall be formed at different levels to cater to grievances/
matters of their concerned jurisdiction. The States should create an online as well as offline
facility through the HRMIS for receiving grievances9 of the employees and ascertain time bound
resolution. Grievances must be treated with utmost confidentiality and sensitivity.
Redressal mechanism procedure is annexed with the document.
9 Complaints pertaining to Sexual Harassment shall be referred to Anti-Sexual Harassment Committee



EMPLOYEE
MANAGEMENT
The State should have a clear policy on employees leaving the State/ District Health Mission
due to any reason, including resignation, termination of contract, superannuation etc. A detailed
procedure, entailing the specified notice period, return of office supplies/ ID Card, exit interviews
etc., should be laid out for the process and formalities of employee separation/exit.
Exit interviews must be conducted with all the employees exiting the organization. The inputs
obtained should be used to improve the working of the organization and retention of skilled and
motivated employees.
A suggestive format on the process of exiting the NHM is annexed for reference.
8.10. Tools for HR Management
8.10.1. Human Resource Information Management Systems (HRMIS)
HRH, being the most important health systems building block that drives the other blocks,
needs a comprehensive, reliable, up to date (preferably real time) and transparent information
system. Various studies across the globe have shown that a well-functioning HRMIS could
give good evidence base on which host of decisions, ranging from availability to productivity,
could be taken. A robust HRMIS can improve the HRH management manifolds andfacilitating
rational posting decisions is one of the most important areas of supportprovided through a well-
functioning HRMIS.
A comprehensive HRMIS facilitates a linkage among all activities pertaining to HR Management.
Ideally, following aspects must be incorporated in the HRMIS:
• HR Planning- It includes information that could assist human resource mobilisation,
career planning, succession planning and inputs for skill development.
• Hiring of Human Resources- It includes advertisement module, recruitment sources,
applicant's profile, selection procedure, appointment and placement.
• Personnel Administration- It includes records of each employee regarding leave,
travel, transfer, deputation, promotion and increments.
• Training and Development- It provides information for designing course material,
training schedule, training module, training methods and appraisal of training
programme etc.
• Appraisal- It contains information about performance rating of employees, which
serves as an input for contract renewal, promotion, increments etc.
• Pay Roll- It consists of information concerning salary, incentives, allowances, taxes
etc.
The State HR cell / Specialized Unit should be responsible for the development of HRMIS either
through coordination with National Informatics Centre (NIC) or internal NHM resource or by
hiring an IT agency. It must be ensured that the HR handling HRMIS at all levels are provided
orientation and proper handholding as and when the System is transferred to them for operation.
Guidelines of MEITY must be followed.10
10 Refer: eHRMS Manav Sampada
Microsoft Word - ManavsampadaHRMS Write up.docx (ehrms.nic.in)



TCUDNOC
FO
EDOC
9
Code of Conduct
The Code of Conduct is designed for the guidance and protection of staff. Every office under
the State Health Mission should formulate an appropriate Code of Conduct Policy, following the
laws and regulations of the land in general and uphold the principles of NHM. A breach of such
policy may well result in disciplinary action, even dismissal and, in cases so requiring, criminal
prosecution.
9.1. Contents of Code of Conduct Policy
The Code of Conduct Policy of the State should, in detail, underline accepted behaviour in the
workplace relating to:
• accepting gifts and entertainment
• procuring contracts (or any other financial misconduct)
• conflict of interest
• use of organizational information that is not available publicly without prior permission
in any form, including social media
• use of official infrastructure for personal use
• any political affiliation or association with any political organisation/ entity
• intellectual property
• concurrent employment or business at another place
• absolute non-tolerance for sexual harassment
• conduct after exit
Note: As part of the Code of Conduct, no staff shall be allowed to take up any other paid
employment, even if part time, whilst employed with the NHM unless permission from the Mission
Director is obtained in writing.



CODE
OF
CONDUCT
The Policy should define malpractice and fraud, actions indicating favouritism and bias at the
workplace and should lay down penalties in the instance of any breach.
Any observation that indicates abuse, fraud, malpractice, or any other breach of the Code of
Conduct must be reported with supporting evidence.
9.3. Anti-Harassment Committee
NHM is committed to an environment of mutual appreciation and respect. The organization and
its members must be gender sensitive and socially inclusive.
In case of any incident of harassment, the staff members should be encouraged to report such
incidents at the earliest.
All offices under NHM fall under the jurisdiction of THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT
WORKPLACE (PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013.
As per the Act11 every workplace shall, by an order in writing, constitute a Committee to be
known as the “Internal Complaints Committee” at all levels of administrative units or offices.
It is the duty of the State to ensure the formation of the committee and follow the procedure laid
out by the Act for resolution of complaints of sexual harassment at the workplace.
11 The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013|Legislative Department |
Ministry of Law and Justice | GoI



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
I
Suggestive Procedural Formats
Deputation Principles and Process
Deputation may be undertaken toensure that the NHM has an available pool of suitable
personnel to occupy critical positions in the organization, whenever required.
Deputation Process
State may appoint staff on deputation under NHM for a specific period of time as decided by
Executive Committee/ Governing Body. The Mission Director shall be the approving authority
for all staff appointed on deputation to the SHS. No posts under service delivery HRH to be
appointed on deputation under NHM.
While publishing the job advertisement, it shall be explicitly mentioned that the positions are
also open for the in-service candidates on deputation. The eligibility and shortlisting criteria
should follow the same procedure as for external candidates. The job applications of the in-
service candidates would be routed through their respective Head of Departments to the HR
Cell along with the applicant's No Objection Certificate (NOC). In case, they are deputed at
District level, it is expected of them to formally visit and introduce themselves to the chairperson
of the District Health Society i.e., the DM.
The staff should be engaged through contract with State Health Society on deputation as per
the standard term of engagement. Once appointed, the deputed staff will be governed by the
rules and regulations of the SHS. All staff on-deputation must undergo performance appraisal
as per the laid guidelines. In general, the period of deputation is to be a maximum for three
years or as prescribed by the EC/ GB, subject to the outcome of the performance appraisal.
Terms & Conditions
The terms and condition for staff on deputation is detailed below:
• The MD (NHM) shall be the approving authority for all staff appointed on deputation
to the NHM.
• Mode of Appointment: Staff on deputation would be engaged through a contract,



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
be governed by the rules and regulations of NHM.
• Duration & Contract Renewal: In general, the period of deputation would be for
three years or as prescribed by the state, subject to the outcome of the performance
appraisal conducted every year.
• Performance Appraisal: All staff on deputation should undergo performance
appraisal as per the Staff Performance Management Policy of NHM.
• Remuneration: The contract should mention the consolidated salary per month and
applicable deductions (TDS etc.) clearly.
• Leave: The contract should mention the number of days of annual leave available
for employees during their period of employment.
• Service Entitlements: The contract should also mention the TA/DA and other
entitlements the candidate is allowed as per the state policy.
• The location of posting and the reporting authority should be clearly identified.
• The contract should also include the roles and responsibilities related to the deputed
position.
• Termination/ End of Contract: The posting of the contractual staff on deputation
may be terminated if their performance is found unsatisfactory or if any criminal
offence is proved against them in a court of law. They can also be terminated as a
consequence of disciplinary action. They could also end their contract voluntarily
and on termination, the staff on deputation will return to their parent department.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
A well-designed ToR helps to streamline employee management. While developing or reviewing
of JD /TOR, the following critical components should be taken into consideration:
a) Position Details: This section must include general information about the job
including job title/ position, job type of engagement, department, place of posting,
compensation to be paid, number of posts, job description summary.
b) Job Responsibilities: This section should provide details of scope and level
responsibility associated with the job. This is to include: 1) Key Accountabilities/ Key
Functions; 2) Detailed list of tasks to be performed associated with each of the key
functions; 3) Performance Standards: to convey expectations of the job and provide
a basis for measuring performance.
c) Key Requirements: This section should outline the knowledge, skills, experience and
standards required for entry into the job. This should also include other conditions
applicable to the job.
Position Details
Job Title Role Name: e.g., Finance Manager, Doctor, Staff Nurse
Department Department under NHM: SHS-RNTCP Division; District Hospital
Place and location of Specify facility/ place where the position is established: district
Posting hospital/ district/ block along with the geographical location
Type of Engagement Job Type: e.g.,Contractual, Full-time, Part-time,time period of
probation, if applicable
Position Number Number of position available: e.g., 4 posts of Staff Nurse at district
hospital; 2 posts of staff nurse at CHC xyz
Compensation As per state norms and compensation approved in the Records of
Proceedings of PIP
Job Responsibilities
Roles and Responsibilities Detailed description of tasks to be performed: e.g., prepare
budgetary reports, analyse expenditure, monitoring
Reporting Structure Mention the immediate reporting officer and other reviewing
officers.
Performance Standards Performance expectations associated with Key Functions: e.g.
complete administrative tasks on time; reviewing and analysing
financial reports, carry out routine supervision and monitoring of
accounts staff at district/ block level
Key Requirements
Required Qualification What qualifications, licences or education level is need: e.g.
Bachelor’s Degree in Finance, Accounting or related field (MBA
preferred)
This may be further detailed into essential and preferred/ desirable
Minimum Experience What type and how much experience is needed: e.g., 3 years of
Level previous experience in a similar role/ sector
Desired skills and List skills needed for the job, including any technical or interpersonal
competencies skills: e.g., ability to work well in a large team, presentation and
analytical skills, knowledge of Microsoft Office Suite
Other key information that could be elaborated during the development of JD / TOR:


#### [Table Content]
| Position Details |  |
| --- | --- |
| Job Title | Role Name: e.g., Finance Manager, Doctor, Staff Nurse |
| Department | Department under NHM: SHS-RNTCP Division; District Hospital |
| Place and location of Posting | Specify facility/ place where the position is established: district hospital/ district/ block along with the geographical location |
| Type of Engagement | Job Type: e.g.,Contractual, Full-time, Part-time,time period of probation, if applicable |
| Position Number | Number of position available: e.g., 4 posts of Staff Nurse at district hospital; 2 posts of staff nurse at CHC xyz |
| Compensation | As per state norms and compensation approved in the Records of Proceedings of PIP |
| Job Responsibilities |  |
| Roles and Responsibilities | Detailed description of tasks to be performed: e.g., prepare budgetary reports, analyse expenditure, monitoring |
| Reporting Structure | Mention the immediate reporting officer and other reviewing officers. |
| Performance Standards | Performance expectations associated with Key Functions: e.g. complete administrative tasks on time; reviewing and analysing financial reports, carry out routine supervision and monitoring of accounts staff at district/ block level |
| Key Requirements |  |
| Required Qualification | What qualifications, licences or education level is need: e.g. Bachelor’s Degree in Finance, Accounting or related field (MBA preferred) |
|  | This may be further detailed into essential and preferred/ desirable |
| Minimum Experience Level | What type and how much experience is needed: e.g., 3 years of previous experience in a similar role/ sector |
| Desired skills and competencies | List skills needed for the job, including any technical or interpersonal skills: e.g., ability to work well in a large team, presentation and analytical skills, knowledge of Microsoft Office Suite |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
sources for further information regarding the Mission
b) Relaxation: The State Selection Committee may wishto consider appropriate
relaxations for candidates. For example, this could include current employment under
NHM for more than 3 years or candidates working in inaccessible or hard to reach
areas under NHM. In addition, the committee could decide to set local selection
criteria for situations where attrition is particularly high. The flexibility provided by
the NHM may be used to provide suitable financial and non-financial incentives.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
Service Delivery Staff
Job Responsibilities of Specialist – Obstetrics & Gynaecology
• Provide OPD and IPD services related to Obstetrics & Gynaecology.
• Provide quality maternal care in the diagnosis and management of Antenatal,
Intranatal& Postnatal period of normal and abnormal pregnancy including
emergencies
• Round the clock management of normal and complicated deliveries.
• Round the clock provision of Caesarean deliveries facilities for all indicated cases.
• Management of assisted vaginal deliveries.
• Provision of Safe abortion services.
• Diagnosis and management of all types of gynaecological problems.
• Perform Hysterectomy and other gynaecological surgeries in indicated cases.
• Administration of Inj. Iron sucrose and blood transfusion in indicated cases.
• Provision of ultrasonography services, in case the specialist, is trained in
ultrasonography.
• Counselling and provision of family planning services and performing family planning
operations (conventional and laparoscopic).
• Management of common neonatal problems.
• Post-Partum management.
• Provision of services regarding RTI/STI and infertility.
• Perform duties regarding MTP/MVA services.
• Providing services under PMSMA and other maternal health schemes.
• Conducting Maternal Death Review both in the institution as well as by home visits.
• Management of Medico-Legal Cases (Rape, Sexual Assault, etc.).
• Work with other physicians and surgeons to decide on treatments and procedures
before, during, and after surgery.
• Follow standard operating procedures / clinical protocols, evidence-based practice,
rational prescription of medication while treating the patient.
• Collect, record, and maintain patient’s information, such as medical history,
reports, and examination results; from patients, family members, or other medical
professionals.
• Provide consulting services to other physicians.
• He/ she shall be responsible for all the special cases referred to her/him; providing
curative prescription/ procedures/ surgeries; based on need, emergency and
availability of resources.
• Refer the patient to other specialists/ practitioners when necessary.
• Disclosure of any crime to the police, if during the course of treating the patient, he/



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
• Keeping himself/ herself up to date with recent medical developments, new drugs,
treatments and medications, including complementary medicine.
• Maintaining the highest standards of ethical practices by adhering to the code of
medical ethics.
• Following the Acts, Rules, Regulations made by the Central/ State Governments or
local administrative bodies or any other relevant act relating to the protection and
promotion of public health.
• Provide Teaching/ Training/ Capacity building to doctors and other healthcare staff,
as and when required.
• Participate in community outreach programmes (e.g., anaemia prevention, pulse
polio, save the girl child, adolescent and school health, etc.) throughout the year.
• Ensure his/her attendance and availability at the Hospital/ Health Centre, during
prescribed working hours, as well as during emergency duty hours, as ordered.
• He/ she must also ensure availability to the hospital over the residential landline/
mobile, whenever necessary.
• Monitor the patient progress or response to treatments.
• Visit patients admitted under speciality treatment under her/him in the hospital, at
least twice a day and as many times as required.
• Address concerns or answer the questions that patients or their relatives have about
patient’s health and well-being
• Ensure that each patient under her/his care, receive a bed-head ticket, on which all
instructions regarding diet and treatment and complete details about the patient’s
medical history and diagnosis, are recorded.
• Ensure that all instructions written by her/him on the bed-head ticket/ OPD-ticket
are strictly complied with by concerned staff, reporting any laxity or carelessness to
the Superintendent/ Officer-in-charge of the Hospital/ Health Centre, for appropriate
action.
• Ensure that sick patients under her/his care are properly treated and cared for in
every way.
• S/he must resolve observed deficiency (if any) in the patient care immediately or
report it in writing, to the officers-in-charge.
• Ensuring the privacy and confidentiality of the patients.
• Provide health and wellness advice to patients, parents or guardians, and community
members concerning diet, exercise, activity, hygiene, and disease prevention.
• Ensure patient-centric and patient-friendly attitude (through smiling face; by being
compassionate, polite, humble, etc.) and thereby enhance the patient’s satisfaction
and cooperation in the provision of quality of healthcare.
• Ensure that all instruments and equipment of the Hospital/ Health Centre kept under
her/his charge, are carefully stored, and guarded against deterioration from whatever
cause.
• Submit all indents and reports to the Superintendent / Officer-in-charge of the
hospital/ Health Centre, on the prescribed date and time.
• Supervise patient care personnel.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
• Prepare government or organizational reports on disease statistics, workforce
evaluations, or the medical status of individuals.
• Write-up all books and records as directed by the Superintendent /Officer-in-charge
of the Hospital/ Health Centre.
• Obey orders of the Superintendent/ Officer-in-charge, on all matters connected with
the patient and management of the Hospital/ Health Centre.
• Any additional responsibility, as assigned by the authority.
Job Responsibilities of Specialist – Paediatrician
• Provide paediatric OPD and IPD services.
• Attend all paediatric emergencies.
• Examine infants, adolescents, and young adults to evaluate their mental and physical
growth and development. Also, Plan and execute medical care programmes for this.
• Examine paediatric patients and interpret diagnostic tests to obtain information on
the medical condition and determine a diagnosis.
• Prescribe or administer treatment, therapy, medication, vaccination, and other
specialized medical care to treat or prevent illness, disease, or injury in infants and
children.
• Monitor paediatric patients' conditions and progress and re-evaluate treatments as
necessary.
• Explain procedures and discuss test results or prescribed treatments with paediatric
patients and parents or guardians.
• Attend all high-risk deliveries, caesarean and attend to all neonatal emergencies.
• Round the clock management of paediatric Indoor patient department, Sick New
Born Care unit (SNCU) / New-born stabilization Unit (NBSU)/ Paediatric Intensive Care
Unit (PICU) and Nutritional Rehabilitation Centre (NRC)/Comprehensive Lactation
Management Centres(CMTC) in the district.
• Management of cases of Protein Energy Malnutrition and Vitamin Deficiencies.
• Perform the review of Child Death.
• Follow standard operating procedures / clinical protocols, evidence-based practice,
rational prescription of medication while treating the patient.
• Collect, record, and maintain patient’s information, such as medical history,
reports, and examination results; from patients, family members, or other medical
professionals.
• Provide consulting services to other physicians.
• He/ she shall be responsible for all the special cases referred to her/him; providing
curative prescription/ procedures/ surgeries; based on need, emergency and
availability of resources.
• Refer the patient to another specialist/ practitioners when necessary.
• Attend and treat all medico-legal cases without an unnecessary referral.
• Disclose crimes to the police, if during the course of treating the patient, he/she
becomes aware of the commission of or intention of committing an offence.



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
treatments and medications, including complementary medicine.
• Maintaining the highest standards of ethical practices by adhering to the code of
medical ethics.
• Following the Acts, Rules, Regulations made by the Central/ State Governments or
local administrative bodies or any other relevant act relating to the protection and
promotion of public health.
• Provide Teaching/ Training/ Capacity building to doctors and other healthcare staff,
as and when required.
• Participate in community outreach programmes such as school health programme,
pulse polio programme, breastfeeding promotion in the community.
• Ensure his/her attendance and availability at the Hospital/ Health Centre, during
prescribed working hours, as well as during emergency duty hours, as ordered.
• He/ she must also ensure availability to the hospital over the residential landline/
mobile, whenever necessary.
• Monitor paediatric patient progress or responses to treatments.
• Visit patients admitted under speciality treatment under her/him in the hospital, at
least twice a day and as many times as required.
• Address concerns or answer the questions that patients or their relatives have about
patient’s health and well-being
• Ensure that each patient under her/his care, receive a bed-head ticket, on which all
instructions regarding diet and treatment and complete details about the patient’s
medical history and diagnosis, are recorded;
• Ensure that all instructions written by her/him on the bed-head ticket/ OPD-ticket are
strictly complied with by concerned staff, reporting any laxity or carelessness to the
Officer-in-charge of the Hospital/ FRU/ CHC, for appropriate action.
• Ensure that sick patients under her/his care are properly treated and cared for in
every way.
• S/he must resolve observed deficiency (if any) in the patient care immediately or
report it in writing, to the officers-in-charge.
• Ensuring Privacy and Confidentiality of the patients
• Provide health and wellness advice to paediatric patients, parents or guardians,
and community members; concerning diet, exercise, activity, hygiene, and disease
prevention.
• Ensure patient-centric and patient-friendly attitude (through smiling face; by being
compassionate, polite, humble, etc.) and thereby enhance the patient’s satisfaction
and cooperation in the provision of quality of healthcare.
• Ensure that all instruments or equipment of the Hospital/ Health Centre kept under
her/his charge, are carefully stored and guarded against deterioration from whatever
cause.
• Submit all indents and reports to the Superintendent / Officer-in-charge of the
hospital/ Health Centre, on the prescribed date and time.
• Supervise patient care personnel.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
• Prepare government or organizational reports on disease statistics, workforce
evaluations, or the medical status of individuals.
• Write-up all books and records as directed by the Superintendent /Officer-in-charge
of the Hospital/ Health Centre.
• Obey orders of the Superintendent/ Officer-in-charge, on all matters connected with
the patient and management of the Hospital/ Health Centre.
• Any additional responsibility, as assigned by the authority.
Job Responsibilities of Specialist – Anaesthetist
• OPD (Pre-Anaesthetic check-up Clinic and Pain Clinic) and IPD services.
• Attending OT sessions.
• Provision of anaesthesia and perioperative medical services for patients as required.
• Perform bedside Pre-Anaesthetic check-up for the patients who cannot move or be
shifted from their beds.
• Provision of appropriate post-operative care, with special attention to acute pain and
adverse effects which may be related to anaesthesia.
• Work with other physicians and surgeons to decide on treatments and procedures
before, during, and after surgery.
• Provide services as an intensivist, in management of critical cases.
• Clinical management of acute pain services and participation in pain medicine units
where applicable.
• Provision of acute resuscitation services for all emergencies.
• Management of patients in the intensive care unit, particularly when there is non-
availability of General Medicine specialist.
• Management of anaesthesia in remote locations, as and when required, like surgical
camps, surgeries conducted at SDH/ CHC, etc.
• Follow standard operating procedures / clinical protocols, evidence-based practice,
rational prescription of medication while treating the patient.
• Collect, record, and maintain patient’s information, such as medical history,
reports, and examination results; from patients, family members, or other medical
professionals.
• Provide consulting services to other physicians.
• He/ she shall be responsible for all the special cases referred to her/him; providing
curative prescription/ procedures/ surgeries; based on need, emergency and
availability of resources.
• Refer the patient to other specialists/ practitioners when necessary.
• Attend and treat all medico-legal cases without an unnecessary referral.
• Disclosure of the crimes to the police, if during the course of treating the patient, he
becomes aware of the commission of or intention of committing an offence.
• Keeping himself/ herself up to date with recent medical developments, new drugs,
treatments and medications, including complementary medicine.



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
medical ethics.
• Following the Acts, Rules, Regulations made by the Central/ State Governments or
local administrative bodies or any other relevant acts relating to the protection and
promotion of public health.
• Provide Teaching/ Training/ Capacity building to doctors and other healthcare staff,
as and when required.
• Participate in community outreach programmes.
• Ensure his/her attendance and availability at the Hospital/ Health Centre, during
prescribed working hours, as well as during emergency duty hours, as ordered.
• He/ she must also ensure availability to the hospital over the residential landline/
mobile, whenever necessary.
• Monitor the patient progress or response to treatments.
• Visit patients admitted under speciality treatment under her/him in the hospital, at
least twice a day and as many times as required.
• Address concerns or answer the questions that patients or their relatives have about
patient’s health and well-being.
• Ensure that each patient under her/his care, receive a bed-head ticket, on which all
instructions regarding diet and treatment and complete details about the patient’s
medical history and diagnosis, are recorded.
• Ensure that all instructions written by her/him on the bed-head ticket/ OPD-ticket
are strictly complied with by concerned staff, reporting any laxity or carelessness to
the Superintendent/ Officer-in-charge of the Hospital/ Health Centre, for appropriate
action.
• Ensure that sick patients under her/his care are properly treated and cared for in
every way.
• S/he must resolve observed deficiency (if any) in the patient care immediately or
report it in writing, to the officers-in-charge.
• Ensuring the privacy and confidentiality of the patients.
• Provide health and wellness advice to patients, parents or guardians, and community
members; concerning diet, exercise, activity, hygiene, and disease prevention.
• Ensure patient-centric and patient-friendly attitude (through smiling face; by being
compassionate, polite, humble, etc.) and thereby enhance the patient’s satisfaction
and cooperation in the provision of quality of healthcare.
• Ensure that all instruments or equipment of the Hospital/ Health Centre kept under
her/his charge, are carefully stored and guarded against deterioration from whatever
cause.
• Submit all indents and reports to the Superintendent / Officer-in-charge of the
hospital/ Health Centre, on the prescribed date and time.
• Supervise patient care personnel.
• Managing nursing staff and delegates tasks appropriately.
• Prepare government or organizational reports on disease statistics, workforce
evaluations, or the medical status of individuals.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
of the Hospital/ Health Centre.
• Obey orders of the Superintendent/ Officer-in-charge, on all matters connected with
the patient and management of the Hospital/ Health Centre.
• Any additional responsibility, as assigned by the authority.
Job Responsibilities of Staff Nurse
Duties & Responsibilities related to Patient Care
• S/he will assess the needs of the patients in the ward and make a nursing care plan
for all patients consulting with ward sister.
• S/he will give direct patient care (bed making, changing of bed sheets, mouth
care, back care, bed bathing, hair wash, changing of position, etc.) and allotted
responsibility to her/him by the ward sister.
• S/he will provide attention to pressure points of the patient four hourly, or more
frequent.
• S/he will ensure the provisions of bedpans, urine pots, and hot water bottle to the
patient.
• S/he will fulfil all basic needs (hygienic need, nutritional need, etc.) of the patients.
• S/he will provide comfort to the patient and maintain the safety of the patient
(universal safety precaution).
• S/he will talk to pre-operative patients to reduce their tension and give them
confidence.
• S/he will take over the charge from duty nurse of previous shift, regarding patients
(bed to bed), instrument supplies, drugs etc. and handed over the same to the next
shift.
• S/he will carry out procedures of admission, discharge and transfer of patient of the
ward.
• S/he will take care that discharged patients goes home with a proper understanding
of the follow-up procedures and details of the diet, medication, exercise, etc.
• S/he will be responsible for taking a history of the patient.
• S/he will be especially responsible for the care of acutely ill patients in the ward.
• S/he will prepare and assist in the diagnostic procedure in the ward.
• S/he will provide minor dressing in an emergency.
• S/he will administer drugs by injection upon written order of the Doctor.
• S/he will learn the handling of special gadgets & equipment.
• S/he will distribute diet, milk, etc.
• S/he will meet normal and special nutritional needs of the patient and give a special
type of feeding, e.g., gastrostomy feed, nasal feeds, etc., supervise the distribution of
diet and report, if necessary.
• S/he will maintain a duty room in readiness for all time.
• S/he will be responsible for observation of the patient's condition, take prompt action



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
• S/he will give health education to the patients and their family members under care.
• S/he will make records of all procedures of her/his patients and keep them up to
date.
• S/he will maintain case papers, investigation reports, etc. in the proper file or board.
She will take care that all reports get attached to the correct case paper. E.g.,
temperature charts, in taking output charts or any special chart maintained.
• S/he will take care that case papers are not allowed to be handled by anyone except
the doctor-in-charge of the patient. This is specifically for medico-legal cases.
• S/he will render pre-operative, post-operative and intensive care to the patient in any
critical care unit.
• S/he will provide assistance and instructions to the patients and their relatives.
• S/he will collect, label and dispatch the specimens.
• S/he will escort the patient to and from the department.
• S/he will receive the reports and give it to the patients as well as inform the doctor.
• S/he will listen to the patient’s problems and help to solve them through various
means.
• S/he will ensure the privacy of the patients (e.g., close curtains or doors during exams
and procedures, discuss confidential or sensitive information only with appropriate
parties, etc.)
• S/he will respect the cultural and religious differences of the patients.
Duties & Responsibilities related to Operation Theatre
• S/he will be responsible:
• To maintain the aseptic environment of the Operation Theatre
• To autoclave the instruments, gloves, linen, equipment, etc. of the unit
• To check and verify all the electrical points for working condition
• To lay out the trolley according to the operation list
• To prepare the trolley of anaesthesia
• To check Oxygen, Carbon dioxide, Nitrous Oxide, emergency drugs, crush trolley etc.
& keep them ready at hand
• To carry out the instruction of O.T. Sister when necessary
• To assist the Surgeon and Anaesthetic in operation theatre
• To count all instruments and mops before closing the wounds
• To monitor the condition and take care of the patient during the operation and
postoperatively in the recovery room
• To act as O.T. Sister in her/his absence
• To fumigate the O.T. room periodically



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
S/he will be responsible to provide antenatal, intra-natal, postnatal care as taught in the nursing
curriculum.
• Labour Room Management –
• To carbolise the labour room daily
• To autoclave instruments, gloves, linen, equipment, etc. of the unit
• To keep ready the confinement trolley & episiotomy tray, forceps tray etc.
• To keep ready emergency drugs, fluids, equipment, Boyle’s apparatus and other
necessary gadgets
• To keep ready the baby resuscitation table, warmer, oxygen, pre-warmed linens etc.
for the resuscitation of the new-born
• To check all electrical points are in working condition
• To assess the progress of labour by using partograph
• To assist the doctors in any procedure the labour room
• To supervise the students and ancillary staff
• To conduct normal delivery and provide care to the new born
• To resuscitate new-born if needed
• To repair episiotomy wounds accordance the laid down policy of the hospital.
• To carry out the duties as instructed by the unit in-charge
• To follow the waste management protocol
• To maintain a Logbook properly
• To maintain all records, outcome indicators as per LaQshya guidelines
Duties & Responsibilities related to Critical Care Unit (I.C.U./ Burn Unit/ H.D.U./ S.N.C.U.
unit)
• To maintain the standard protocol of asepsis strictly
• To maintain the hand washing protocol, dress protocol as prescribed
• To autoclave and disinfect necessary articles, instruments, linen, gadgets, equipment,
etc. and keep ready for use
• To check all electrical points, pipeline oxygen, inbuilt suckers for proper working
condition
• To communicate with a concerned person for proper maintenance of the unit
• To carry out the instructions of the sister-in-charge as allocated by her
• To prepare the drugs, crash trolley, etc. properly
• To check Oxygen, Carbon dioxide, Nitrous Oxide etc. for proper use.
• To check monitor, ventilator, all life-saving gadgets for proper working condition
• To provide special care to the patient guided by the Medical Officer, e.g., endotracheal
suction
• To fumigate the department periodically



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
Responsibilities related to Ward Administration:
• S/he will ensure to make the ward clean and tidy, including the bed
• S/he will keep all articles well-arranged and maintain the inventory
• S/he will take the report, make bed to bed round at the time of changing of the shift
of the unit
• S/he will maintain all records and mandates
• S/he will orient the new patient with the ward
• S/he will help the ward sister for the supervision of work of Group D allotted in the
ward for maintenance of cleanliness and sanitation
• S/he will make a list of patients belongings and keep in safe custody, according to
the laid down policy of the hospital
• S/he will keep a sub-stock of drugs, linen and other supplies for ward maintenance
• S/he will maintain poisonous/ scheduled drugs registered
• S/he will sterilize all articles, maintain all equipment, gadgets, electrical connections,
light, fan etc.
• S/he will indent drugs, diet, and other supplies if necessary
• S/he will vigilant to protect the patient from injury or accident by providing side rail
• S/he will write a report of each shift and sign the report after checking it
• S/he will assist the ward sister in orientation programme of new staff and students
• S/he will accompany with doctors and senior nursing officers during ‘ward round’
• S/he will help ward sister in indenting and checking of drugs, supplies and maintaining
inventories
• S/he will be deputed for the ward sister during her/his absence
• S/he will hand over the charge and will take charge of the shift
• S/he will prepare surgical supply, bandages and splint
• S/he will take care of disinfection of linen, beds, floor and bedpans
Responsibilities regarding Teaching of Students
• S/he will assign patients to student nurse keeping in mind the level of knowledge of
the student, the learning objective and need of the patients
• S/he will provide direct supervision over patient care by the students in the ward
• S/he will teach, demonstrate, supervise and guide nursing procedure performed by
student Nurses
• S/he will instruct students correct ways of handling bedpans, urinals, sputum cups,
kidney trays, soiled dressings, bandages, binders, linens, etc.
• S/he will teach and demonstrate methods of disinfection, cleaning and biomedical
waste management
• S/he will guide and help the students in giving health education to the patient of the
ward.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
• S/he will assist and participate in any in-service education programme
Others
• S/he will assist in orientation of new staff nurses
• S/he will participate in staff education and staff meeting
• S/he will participate in professional development activities
• S/he will maintain good interpersonal relations with all other staff
• S/he will give information about MLC cases to Head / Officer in charge
• S/he will maintain the BPL patient’s records & DOTS patient’s record
• S/he will co-operate in activities related to the National Health Programmes
• S/he will carry out field works as and when assigned to her/him, in addition to medical
care
• S/he will ensure safe disposal of biomedical waste
• S/he will keep herself/himself up to date with nursing knowledge by taking part in
in-service education programmes
• S/he will perform any other duty that may be assigned to her/him from time to time
Job Responsibilities of Lab Technician
Sampling and Testing
• He/ she will receive and process samples.
• He/ she will draw blood samples for testing (primarily by performing vein punctures).
• He/ she will label specimens/vials accurately and distribute them to the appropriate
departments/ processing centres at the recommended transportation condition.
• He/ she will prepare samples/slides for testing using various types of laboratory
equipment.
• He/ she will conduct all the necessary laboratory investigations (urine, stool, blood,
sputum, pregnancy, swabs, semen, smear preparation and staining, RTI/STD,
biochemistry, Electrolytes, pH, bacterial culture, clinical, serological tests like VDRL
and Widal test, card-based tests, others)
• He/ she will perform routine microscopy
• He/ she will perform biochemical tests and analyses using electrophoresis or
chromatography.
• He/ she will examine and analyse bodily fluids
• He/ she will perform blood grouping and crossmatching
• He/ she will perform anti-microbial susceptibility testing
• If required in certain cases, he/she will be expected to go to the field for sample
collection (for fluorosis etc.)



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
• He/ she will give instructions to the patient regarding sample collection
• He/ she will provide counselling to the patients regarding laboratory procedures
whenever necessary
• He/ she will be friendly, courteous and sympathetic while working with patients.
• He/ she will write/ print and issue the laboratory reports to the patients
• He/ she will ensure that patient confidentiality is maintained at all times
• He/ she will collect feedback form from patients regarding laboratory work
Laboratory Stock Maintenance
• He/ she will be responsible for the upkeep and routine maintenance of the instruments
in the laboratory and update of instrument maintenance records
• He/ she will control laboratory equipment (pipettes, inoculating loops, test tubes,
etc.) and adjust instruments to perform laboratory procedures
• He/ she will clean/sterilize and maintain work area and all lab equipment, accessories
and supplies
• He/ she will make timely indents for chemical, reagents & equipment repairs
• He/ she will prepare chemical reagents, stains, solutions and biological media
according to formulae
• He/ she will accurately label all reagents and other stock in the laboratory
Quality of Services
• He/ she will take care of all quality assurance and quality control norms in the
laboratory, including EQAS, IQAS
• He/ she will follow all safety protocols and standard operating procedures to maintain
hygiene and for prevention of the infection
Data/Record Keeping
• He/ she will maintain the data about all lab procedures
• He/ she will submit weekly/monthly reports of the laboratory work
• He /she will perform online data entry of medical tests, clinical results or any other
programmes
• He/ she will maintain records of supplies, stock and investigations that are done
Knowledge/ Skill upgradation
• He/ she will keep himself/ herself informed about new laboratory techniques.
• He/ she will participate in the development of new medical laboratory procedures
and techniques.
• He/ she will participate in trainings, workshops and continuing education programmes.
• He/ she will keep himself/ herself updated regarding various guidelines on hospital
infection control and management of spills (e.g., Mercury, Chemicals, Body fluids)



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
Job Responsibilities of District Programme Manager (DPM)
• He/she will assist the Chairperson of the District Health Society (GB & EC)/ CMHO in
planning and implementation of all the Public Health programmes in the district
• He/she will assist CMHO in preparing agenda, agenda notes, proceedings of the
DHS and other meetings and follow up action on the decision taken
• He/she will prepare the District Health Action Plan
• He/she will coordinate and deal with all correspondence related to NHM at District
level
• He/she will disseminate all Guidelines in respect of all programmes among all
functionaries at all levels within the district
• He/she will circulate a copy of all the necessary reports/documents/minutes of the
meetings to all related officers within the district
• He/she will create and maintain district resource databases for the health sector
• He/she will ensure distribution of / communication of Resource Envelope (along with
physical and financial targets) (through District Accountant Manager) to all the health
facilities in the district within ___ days from the receipt from the State
• He/she will assess training load and needs in consultation with the blocks/talukas,
prepare training plans and organise district level training
• He/she will do monitoring and following up of health activities at all levels within the
district
• He/she will ensure through regular follow-ups at district, block and below level that
all the necessary reports of the district are prepared timely in the prescribed format.
• He/she will undertake necessary coordination with other divisions at district, block
and below level; and coordinate all programmes running at district level, monitor
underlying gaps and provide supportive supervision
• He/she will ensure that all data/reports of the district are regularly entered in different
e-portals
• He/she will analyse all data/reports of the district, and take corrective measures for
improving outputs of the district
• He/she will submit various reports to the State Programme Management Unit as and
when required
• He/she will identify the cause of any unreasonable delay in the achievement of
milestones, or in the release of funds, and will propose corrective action/solution to
the problem.
• He/she will monitor the implementation of IEC/BCC activities in the districts.
• He/she will ensure that the meetings of all RKSs/VHSCs in his/her District organised
in time, and will collect a copy of the minute of the meetings. (RKS/VHSC Member
Secretary has to convene the meeting, but DPM will facilitate and ensure that the
meetings take place in time).
• He/she will ensure timely renewal of HR Contracts for employee working under
NHM.



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
in consultation with CMHO.
• He/she will visit at least ___ Block/Taluka Health offices, ___ CHC, ____PHC, ___
HWCs in a month and submit field visit report to CMHO.
• He/she will coordinate the collection and distribution of NHM supplies/logistics to
all health institutions in the district. He / She will also maintain the record related to
these supplies
• He/she will develop strategies or plans to improve the quality of service provision to
the people
• He/she will keep watch on the vacant position under District Health Mission, and
inform appropriate authority to fill the vacant positions. When required, he/she will
facilitate the recruitment process
• He/she will coordinate with respective monitoring division and conduct field- level
studies to identify gaps for ascertaining intervention requirements and district action
plan scope
• He/she will coordinate with development partners (aid agencies, UNICEF, WHO etc.
& other NGOs) in the field and ensure convergence of programme activities
• He/she will liaise with other consultants/ Managers/ Officers/ Staff of the NHM
programme at all levels
• He/she will perform any other role/duties that may be assigned by the competent
authority
Job Responsibilities of District Accounts Manager (DAM)
• He/ she will be responsible for the overall financial management of NHM funds
released to the district
• He/ she will be responsible for the development of Annual Financial Plan and Budget
for their district
• He/ she will be responsible for maintaining books of accounts and managing other
finance-related aspects for the district Programme Management Unit
• He/ she will ensure the implementation and maintenance of PFMS in the district
• He/she will ensure disbursement the funds to all the health facilities of the district as
per the guidelines
• He/she will maintain all necessary books of accounts, in accordance with prescribed
guidelines
• He/ she will collect, compile, analyse and submit financial monitoring reports (FMR)
• He/ she will prepare and submit monthly/ quarterly /annual statement of expenditure
(SoE) in prescribed formats
• He/she will ensure timely issue and submission of UCs for the utilized funds.
• He/she will manage the petty cash account of district and monitoring of it for all the
health facilities of the district (if any)
• He/ she will ensure that reconciliation is done for all accounts under the district
• He/ she will ensure that salary and incentives are paid timely to all employees
working under DHM



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
provisions
• He/ she will adhere to the system for periodic Internal Audit and established
accounting system
• He/ she will ensure timely conduct of external audit for the facilities under the district
• He/ she will manage all the registers and records related to financial matters
• He/ she will be responsible for implementation, maintenance and updating of
computerized financial system/PFMS
• He/she will do field visits regarding the financial functioning of the district with
supportive supervision
• He/she will manage the accounts of the Society, including grants received from State
Society as well as funds mobilized from donors and or user fees/membership fees
etc.
• He/she will do supervision of accounts of BPMUs/TPMUs and at facilities including
periodic inspection of accounts and funds management at BPMUs/TPMUs and all the
facilities getting fund from NHM.
• He/she will ensure adherence to laid down accounting standards as may be adopted
by the Governing Body of the District Health Society.
• He/ she will prepare an advance monthly work plan, including a tentative travel plan
in consultation with DPM/CMHO.
• He/ she will liaise with other consultants/ Managers/ Officers/ Staff of the NHM
program at all levels.
• He/ she will perform any other role/duties that may be assigned by the State
Programme Management Unit and District Health Society.
Job Responsibilities of District Data Manager (DDM)
• He/she will analyse physical progress reports and recommend measures for
improving programme performance in the district
• He/she will prepare feedback on the progress reports received from all the facilities
under the district and disseminate it to concerned authorities
• He/she will monitor data quality (timely, completely, correctly) in preparation of
periodic and annual reports
• He/she will follow up with blocks/talukas for regular submission of necessary data
• He/she will prepare and maintain all the databases for the district
• He/she will provide expert technical inputs in the monitoring and evaluation of NHM/
health programmes
• He/she will ensure data entry and analyse data of MIS systems/ all healthrelated
web portals in the District
• He/she will ensure training of all the district health personals on safe data storage
practices/ data management practices
• He/she will monitor the recording/reporting system/maintenance of registers by health
workers through field visits and submit a visit report with appropriate suggestions/
actions for improvement



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
Programme Managers and grass root functionaries on monitoring and evaluation
• He/she will assist the CMHO and DPM in all the matters relating to monitoring &
evaluation of health programmes
• He/she will supervise the functioning of M and E assistant and Data Entry Operator
working in the district
• He/she will assist DPM in preparation of monthly reports, development of DHAP and
routine monitoring
• He/she will organise the maintenance of IT hardware and software for the entire
district
• He/she will ensure that problems of e-connectivity, get solved by an appropriate
person
• He/she will liaise with other consultants/ Managers/ Officers/ Staff of the NHM
programme at all levels
• He/she will perform any other role/duties that may be assigned by the competent
authority
Job Responsibilities of District Community Mobilizer (DCM)
• He/she will prepare a de-centralised annual plan regarding ASHA programme,
VHSNC, VHND, MAS and other related community processes activities (related to
health) in the district
• He/she will ensure the selection of ASHAs & ASHA Facilitator as per norms (Population
& Area)
• He/she will ensure the identification of inactive ASHAs and coordinate with
appropriate authority for their removal
• He/she will keep ASHA Database of the district updated
• He/she will ensure regular training (capacity building) of ASHAs, ASHA Facilitators,
VHSC members, Block/Taluka Community Mobilizers.
• He/she will do regular field visits in the district and will provide supportive supervision
• He/she will ensure the progress of the activities conducted by ASHAs and ASHA
Facilitators
• He/she will ensure timely payment of Performance Incentive to ASHAs & ASHA
Facilitators
• He/she will establish and operationalise the grievances redressal mechanism for
ASHA/ ASHA Facilitator and will ensure that grievances are addressed timely
• He/she will ensure the formation of VHSNC, MAS and RKS, and also that its meetings
held regularly
• He/she will facilitate and supervise the functioning of Block Community Mobilizers
• He/she will ensure inter-sectoral coordination with other Government Departments
within the district. (e.g.WCD, ICDS, PR Water and Sanitary, Education etc.)
• He/she will resolve day to day problems faced by ASHAs and ASHA Facilitators
• He/she will ensure and monitor that all ASHAs and ASHA Facilitators have drug kits
(and other necessary supplies) with them



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
work and contribution to NHM/Community
• He/she will establish a support system for enhancing coordination between DPMU
and ARC
• He/she will be responsible for NGO coordination to ensure district-level support for
ongoing community processes
• He/she will facilitate the community mobilisation process in the district
• He/she will liaise with other consultants/ Managers/ Officers/ Staff of the NHM
program at all levels
• He/she will perform any other role/duties that may be assigned by the State
Programme Management Unit and District Health Society



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
1. Written Exam
The written exam helps in assessing an individual’s knowledge, skills, and competencies and,
to some extent, attitude. To regulate the number of selections, minimum passing marks criteria
should not be set very high or very low. All selected candidates should be informed for the next
level of assessment through proper medium.
• The following procedure should be adopted for conducting written test:The written
test may either be descriptive or objective. Positions requiring expertise in reading,
writing and comprehension skills may be evaluated separately. For e.g., in case of
IEC expert, Communication Expert, Media Expert etc.
• If the number of candidates is very high due to large number of vacancies, written
test should primarily be objective.
• The duration of written test may be nearly an hour.
• HR division / agency should identify the venues; preferably an educational institution
for the written test on paper or OMR sheet and Computer Centre for online written
test.
*In case of contingent/ unforeseen circumstances (as have been during COVID time), online
mode for taking the written test may be explored.
2. Skill Test
Skill Test is strongly recommended by government to ensure the quality of selected candidates.
It should be conducted to assess skills that are critical for the advertised position, e.g.,
demonstrating how to measure blood pressure or plotting a partograph for a Staff Nurse. Skill
assessment can be conducted alongside the written exam and interview or independently, as
appropriate.
• Skill based assessment should preferably be conducted either at skill labs or in
hospitals
• Logistical arrangements with identified institutions should be agreed in advance to
ensure smooth conduct of the competency skill tests.
• A panel of subject matter experts must be identified in advance to assess the
candidates.
• Photography and videography should be conducted as an evidence of conducting
skill test and to ensure fairness.
• A suitable marking sheet should be developed for scoring skill tests.
• This, along with the written test and /or interview shall form the basis for selection of
candidates to the National Health Mission.
3. Interview
Interview plays an integral part in selecting the right candidate and is usually the last stage of
selection procedure. It may be ensured that selection procedure meets the minimum standard of
3:1 i.e., against each available position/ engagement to be made, there be minimum 3 candidates
undertaking the last stage (interview) of selection procedure. During the interview, all submitted



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
• The Interview Panel should consist of a minimum of three members, preferably: (i) One
subject matter expert (ii) One division or programme head (iii) One external or internal
HR expert. The panel should have one woman panellist and one representative of
SC/ST/OBC.
• It is important that interviews objectively assess candidates and avoid personal
bias; a semi-structured questionnaire could be developed in advance to guide the
interview process. It is also important that appropriate questions (ideally same) are
asked to all candidates and a rating scale is used for all responses. The panel should
also be oriented on consistent use of the rating scale. It will be useful to incorporate
situation-based questions to understand how a person would respond to specific
situations. The interview should aim to assess knowledge, attitude and soft skills of
the candidate.
• Individual scoring sheets should be given to each panel member before
commencement of the interview process and the marking process should be
discussed to avoid inconsistency and/or bias.
Suggestive Principles for Calculation of Weightage for Education and
Experience
Weightage on Educational Qualification
• Weightage points based on percentage of marks obtained in the desired education
qualification should be calculated for each candidate. For example, if the weightage
point of educational qualification is 60 and candidate has 70% marks, then it becomes
0.60x 70= 42.
• Similar policy for calculating the points should be developed for the candidates with
grades rather than percentage in their qualification.
Weightage on Experience
• The maximum point and per year points for experience in the relevant field must
be decided before calculating the candidate's individual points. For example, if the
maximum point is 10, and per year weightage point is 2. Then for a candidate who
has 5 years or more than five years of experience gets maximum points i.e., 10x5=10.
A candidate with less than 1 year of experience will get 0 point.
In all the calculations, rounding up of fractional points can be done for convenience.
Final List for Selection
The final list of selection should be based on the aggregate points earned in the various stages
of selection, as per the decided weightage for each stage.



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
The offer letter issued to the selected applicant by SHS/DHS should have the following
Information:
• Name of the Applicant
• Father’s/Husband’s Name
• Date of Birth
• Category (UR/OBC/SC/ST)
• Name of position (for which selected)
• Name of Place of posting (Complete details)
• Last date of joining
• Time of reporting at joining place
• Complete address of joining place
• Type of recruitment (Contractual / Outsourced/ any other mode)
• Duration of recruitment/ contract
• Monthly Honorarium (also mentioned if any Tax applicable)
• Any other terms and conditions
• Documents required during the joining formalities
Note: A copy of the offer letter should also be sent to office of Reporting Officer to facilitate the
joining process and document verification.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
The contract of every employee under NHM shall contain a statement relating to the following
terms and conditions of employment:
• Agreement of confidentiality with State/ District Health Society with a clause of ethics
and integrity: The staff shall not share any data or information with any person or
institute outside Department of Health Services without the prior approval of the
appropriate authority in the department. Prior approval of the department must also
be taken by the staff prior to publication of any article or research paper based on
the data, inputs and information obtained as part of the work under NHM.
• Remuneration to be paid including specifications related to increase in compensation
in future in case of continuation/ renewal of the contract. It should also specify the
method of payment.
• Effective date and duration of the period of employment
• Agreement on the Probation period
• Specific deliverables during the period of contract with specific timelines
• Leaves: The contract should mention the annual leaves available for employee
during the period of employment
• Service Entitlements: The contract should also mention the TA/DA entitlements for the
candidate as per state policy and other entitlements. In case of any additional charge,
the work order contract for the same should clearly mention the reimbursement
provision of additional travel expenses.
• Location of posting and reporting authority should be explicitly mentioned in the
contract.
• Code of conduct and support provided by the State or District Health Society should
also be mentioned.
• Transfer
• Termination of Contract



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
AGREEMENT OF CONTRACT APPOINTMENT UNDER STATE / DISTRICT HEALTH
SOCIETY - ***
This agreement is made on ………………………, BETWEEN Mission Director / Member Secretary of
DHS on behalf of *** State / District Health Society, hereinafter referred as SHS/DHS, ***.
AND
……………………………..., Son/Daughter of, date of birth ……..…… and residing at …………… ……………………,
WHEREAS
…………………………….. has been selected to provide his/her services to the SHS/DHS
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS:
1. SHS/DHS hereby engages you to render services, as ……………………………
………………………………………………(name of position) or any other role authorized by the
SHS/DHS from time to time.
2. You would be assigned to provide services for any of the programs being implemented
by SHS/DHS. In the event of these programs are transferred to any other Society or
Project at a later date, your services may be transferred to the said Society or the
Project.
3. Your appointment has been made on a clear understanding that you have supplied
all necessary information to enable SHS/DHS to judge your fitness for the job and
that the information provided by you is true to the best of your knowledge and belief.
Should it be found later that you have given wrong or insufficient information or
misrepresented facts; your services would be terminated immediately.
4. The position offered to you is on contract for ………….. (e.g. one year; extending not
more than three years), starting from ………………………………….(date of contract) subject
to satisfactory performance. The contract would be reviewed annually by SHS/DHS
based on your performance during the contract period. SHS/DHS might rescind the
contract before completion, if your performance has been found to be unsatisfactory.
If the performance is found to be satisfactory SHS/DHS may consider extending the
contract period for a further period of ………. (e.g. three years) on the same terms &
conditions.
5. You will be on probation for a period of three months from the date of joining. The
period of probation can be extended further for three months at the discretion of the
appropriate personnel in the society. During the period of probation, in case SHS/
DHS is not satisfied with the performance/services, the employee can be terminated
without any notice period.
6. Your place of posting (headquarter) is ………… You would report to …….…. (Name of
reporting officer, with designation). This may be subject to change within the SHS/
DHS depending on administrative requirements.
7. You will not be entitled to compensation if you will fully neglect or refuse or be
unable to perform any of the duties under this engagement. SHS/DHS may suspend
your salary due to such neglect, negligence or inability as aforesaid and may
further immediately terminate your engagement without giving any notice or making
payment of salary in advance.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
in writing or payment of one month's remuneration in lieu thereof. You may also
terminate this appointment by giving one month's notice in writing or payment of one
month's remuneration in lieu thereof.
9. That SHS/DHS during the continuance of your service would give you as compensation
a sum of Rs…………………………… per month The detailed break up (optional) is given as
under:
Basic
HRA
Conveyance Allowance
Communication Allowance
10. Your compensation is a consolidated package and includes all expenditures you are
required to make for high quality performance of your duties. Apart from the sum
mentioned in Clause 9 for duties to be performed outside your work jurisdiction you
will be eligible for a daily allowance and reimbursement of travel costs as per SHS/
DHS Travel Policy.
11. In case your contract is renewed after satisfactory completion of one year, SHS/
DHS may offer an increment based on your performance assessment as per their
Performance Management Policy.
12. SHS/DHS works in an IT enabled environment and as a service provider to SHS/DHS
you are expected to be fully conversant with IT enabled way of working, including
use of email, uploading data on internet enabled data bases, reading notices and
assimilating information from web sites and use of a basic IT enabled devices. You
would also be expected to provide a mobile number through which you can be
contacted at all times. You must inform SHS/DHS of any change in number.
13. You would be entitled to an annual leave of …….. (e.g., twenty days), on a pro-rata
basis. This is inclusive for all types of leaves (including casual leave and sick leave).
Apart from this, you may be entitled to Maternity/ Paternity Leave as per the terms
and conditions of SHS/DHS Leave Policy. This is in addition to one day weekly off to
be fixed by the SHS/DHS.
14. You would also be entitled to National holidays and other holidays as per provisions
made by the State Government declared by SHS/DHS.
15. All other terms and conditions of your engagement including other benefits and
entitlements, if any, transfers, exit and termination, etc. will be governed by the rules
and regulations of SHS/DHS, as amended from time to time.
16. Your engagement with SHS/DHS will stand terminated if you are absent for seven
working days or more, continuously from duty without taking permission from the
competent authority.
17. You shall not be entitled to any other benefits except those mentioned above.
18. You may be transferred to another location by SHS/DHS in the interest of the
programme. You may seek transfer only after completion of at least one year of your
contract. All transfers would be guided by the Staff Transfer Policy laid out in the HR
Manual of SHS/DHS.
19. Apart from work in the office, your work includes field duties at places you are
required to work in as directed by SHS/DHS or its authorized representative. You


#### [Table Content]
| Basic |  |
| --- | --- |
| HRA |  |
| Conveyance Allowance |  |
| Communication Allowance |  |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
when required.
20. You shall not take up any part time/full time employment or assignments elsewhere
or do any business during the period of the contract with SHS/DHS without written
permission of the competent authority.
21. Your engagement will be automatically terminated, if you join any other organization
or take up any assignment without obtaining prior permission.
22. SHS/DHS may terminate your services if you have committed irregularities and
impropriety of administrative and financial nature, negligence of care, unsafe
practices, inefficiency and insincerity, professional misconduct or false reporting of
information or fabrication of data in the maintained records, or any other inappropriate
action as prescribed by the SHS HR Policy.
23. While in contract with SHS/DHS and at any time thereafter, you shall not divulge any
information or knowledge gained and acquired by you during the period of contract,
which could be detrimental to the interests of SHS/DHS.
24. The title rights, copyrights and all other rights of whatsoever nature in any material
produced by SHS/DHS under the period of this contract shall be vested exclusively
in SHS/DHS, unless otherwise vested in Government by virtue of project document
etc.
25. During the period of contract, you shall not stand for election as Member of a
Municipal Committee, Municipal Corporation, District Board, Panchayat or any other
legislative body.
26. You shall conduct yourself at all times with fullest regard for the purposes and
principles of SHS/DHS and in a manner befitting your relationship with SHS/DHS
under the contract. You shall not engage in any activity that is incompatible with
those purposes and principles or the proper discharge of your duties. You shall avoid
any action and in particular any kind of public announcement which may adversely
reflect on the relationship, or on the integrity, independence and impartiality which
are required by the relationship. You shall not accept any favour, gift or remuneration
from any source external to SHS/DHS without first obtaining approval in writing for
the same.
27. You shall stay at your place of posting unless you are on pre-approved tour.
28. Notwithstanding anything contained herein before, rules, regulations, bye-laws,
instructions, lawful orders, etc. as and when framed and issued by SHS/DHS
relating to the conditions of the service and additions, amendments, modifications,
alterations, etc. made in the said conditions of service from time to time shall apply
to you irrespective of whether these matters are provided for herein or not.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the candidates hereto have caused this contract to be signed in their
respective names as of the day and year first above written.
Signature of the Candidate
Witnesses:
1.
2.
Mission Director/ Member Secretary of DHS



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
Day Thematic area Description
Day 1- Day 8 Initial Orientation
Day 1 Introduction to National Health Objective and strategies, structure and
Mission function of NHM
Day 2 Orientation of Duties and Role of the incumbent, overall
Responsibilities responsibilities specific to monitoring and
evaluation
Day 3 Monitoring and evaluation Constitution of M&E Division, Basic duties
system of each team member. Details of all
process related to Resource allocation and
utilization
Day 4 Introduction to the partner Sessions on the role and involvement
departments of water & sanitation, women & child
development
Day 5 Administrative Orientation Reporting details of the various programs
under NHM
Day 6 Introduction to policies under Various policies- transfer, posting,
NHM promotion, code of conduct
Day 7 Introduction to leadership and Types of leadership and their applications,
Orientation to management supportive supervision; Exercise on
strategy Communication, presentation skills and on
team building,
Day 8 – Day 11: Local (facility level) Orientation
Day 8 Facility orientation District office and District hospital
Day 9 Facility orientation Sub district hospital and Block level office
Day 10 Facility orientation CHC, PHC and SC
Day 11 Presentation from trainees Presentation on the observations of field
visits. (May also include other relevant
areas for presentation)
12 The induction training should preferably be three to five days at a stretch. The completion of training could be done in two to
three phases.


#### [Table Content]
| Day | Thematic area | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Day 1- Day 8 Initial Orientation |  |  |
| Day 1 | Introduction to National Health Mission | Objective and strategies, structure and function of NHM |
| Day 2 | Orientation of Duties and Responsibilities | Role of the incumbent, overall responsibilities specific to monitoring and evaluation |
| Day 3 | Monitoring and evaluation system | Constitution of M&E Division, Basic duties of each team member. Details of all process related to Resource allocation and utilization |
| Day 4 | Introduction to the partner departments | Sessions on the role and involvement of water & sanitation, women & child development |
| Day 5 | Administrative Orientation | Reporting details of the various programs under NHM |
| Day 6 | Introduction to policies under NHM | Various policies- transfer, posting, promotion, code of conduct |
| Day 7 | Introduction to leadership and Orientation to management strategy | Types of leadership and their applications, supportive supervision; Exercise on Communication, presentation skills and on team building, |
| Day 8 – Day 11: Local (facility level) Orientation |  |  |
| Day 8 | Facility orientation | District office and District hospital |
| Day 9 | Facility orientation | Sub district hospital and Block level office |
| Day 10 | Facility orientation | CHC, PHC and SC |
| Day 11 | Presentation from trainees | Presentation on the observations of field visits. (May also include other relevant areas for presentation) |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
a. This is the first step in the training process and entails a situational analysis of the
gap between what is currently practiced and what is required. The process includes
an assessment of skills and knowledge currently required by various employees
to perform current and future tasks. Need assessment helps in identification of
performance gaps that can be bridged through training.
b. There are two ways to conduct training needs assessment:
• The first is to conduct a job analysis, by identifying necessary knowledge, skills
and abilities to perform a specific job and compare it with the skills that the
employee already possesses. A training program is then structured based on
the identified gaps.
• The other is to conduct performance evaluation surveys for various employees
to identify training gaps, taking into account observations of immediate
supervisors, feedback from the subordinate staff and other colleagues,as well
as any changes in program priorities or introduction of new programs.
c. For clinical staff, the National Training Strategy (prepared by NIHFW) is already in
place and specific training can be rolled out based on the needs and requirements
of the job.
d. This process requires an accurate and up-to-date record of the skills and competencies
of individual employees, supported by a comprehensive and operational Human
Resource management Information System. The state must develop a database
of trained personnel which should be updated routinely for planning and needs
assessment for training. This data-base should document information about in-service
trainings attended by employees and results of any assessments/evaluations.
e. If the training load is very high, the following criteria can be used for priority selection
of candidates for in-service training:
• Employees from high priority districts should be given preference.
• Employees from high case load facilities should be preferred over those with
lesser foot fall.
• Those candidates who have demonstrated successful utilization of training
skills in the past should be given preference.
• There should be a gap of 3-6 months between two training courses so that
employees have adequate opportunity and time to practice newly acquired
skills.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
The performance of staff under NHM may be assessed on a periodic basis at least once every
year, and a six-monthly interim appraisal should also be carried out. The annual assessment
should be linked to the compensation review, as the performance rating would determine the
hike in remuneration that may be provided to the staff. The six-monthly assessments should
be conducted twice: first in the month of October (to be completed before 31st October) and
a second/final assessment in the month of April (to be completed before 30th April). The
assessment should ideally incorporate a 360-degree feedback, but as a minimum, the process
should include both self-appraisal and the reporting officer’s feedback. Decisions related to
contract renewals, annual increments and performance-based incentives should be based on
these appraisals.
The State HR Cell should set KRAs/indicators for assessment. The State HR Cell should discuss
these with the districts and assist them in tweaking the same, if required, as per the district’s
context.
While measuring the work performance, the staff/ personal (assessee/ appraisee) may score
themselves as per the rating system and provide justification or record their achievements
against each indicator. The self-assessment forms may then be submitted to the Nodal Officers/
Reporting authorities/ Supervisors (assessor/ appraiser) for assessing and recording their score
and are expected to consider previous performance of the department/facility while evaluating
individual performance. The self-appraisal formats once completed between the employee
and their supervisor should be submitted to a performance appraisal committee for verification,
arbitration, if needed, and further action – in terms of incentive approvals, contract reviews
and corrective actions, as appropriate or third-party evaluation may be conducted by any
other official or representative identified by Mission Director (3rd Party Assessor). A copy of the
assessment score sheet should be shared with the staff being appraised.
If there are significant differences in the scores between self-appraisal and the assessment of
the reporting officer, this should be discussed to ascertain the reasons for this discrepancy and
take corrective actions, if needed.
The final scoring may be done through weighted average of the scores received in Work
Performance Based Assessment and Knowledge and Competency Based Assessment indicators.
Weightage of 60% is to be given to the Work Performance Based Assessment Indicators, while
40% weightage is to be given to Knowledge and Competency Based Assessment Indicators.
The final rating sheet should be duly signed by both the assessors. The completed forms should
be kept in the custody of the HR department.
Indicative Rating System for Performance Appraisal
Overall rating may vary from 0 to 5 (or a grading system as developed by the State) wherein the
assessee will be rated between 0 to 5 for each of the KPI wherein the score may be defined as:
Exceeds Expectation (Score= 5):
y Consistently performs and assists other staff with work assignments that are
thorough and well-organized; staff is proactive in identifying improvements to
enhance performance; implements and customizes best practices.
y Uses time efficiently to consistently meets deadlines; consistently checks own work



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
set standards; assists in the re-work of others; pays attention to details and accuracy;
sets the standard for quality of work performed in the department; successfully
performs additional responsibilities as needed.
Meets Expectations (Score= 3):
y Has the knowledge, skills and abilities to successfully perform duties; assignments
are well organized and thorough; implements best practices; most duties are
performed with minimal supervision.
y Consistently meets deadlines; produces work that is typically free of errors;
consistently checks own work and corrects errors for accuracy; uses time wisely by
assisting other staff/ co-workers and performing tasks without having to be asked;
consistently generates acceptable quantity and quality of work.
Requires Improvement (Score= 1):
y Does not consistently exhibit the knowledge, skills and abilities to successfully
perform duties, for most assignments, close supervision still necessary; does not
consistently perform routine duties; fails to implement and/or lacks knowledge of
the best practices; additional guidance and/or training is required to successfully
perform duties.
y Needs to minimize errors in work; is not consistent in producing accurate work or
volume of work, and/or does not complete work assignments according to pre-
established deadlines or quality standards set; takes on additional responsibilities
and fails to perform primary duties.
Below Expectations (Score= 0):
y Has not exhibited the knowledge, skills and abilities to successfully perform duties,
close supervision is required to successfully perform duties; does not ask questions
when unclear or continues to ask questions about duties that have been reviewed
several times; has been provided with the resources and support; but is not able and/
or willing to successfully perform duties.
y Does not produce the standard volume of work, and/or complete work assignments
according to pre- established guidelines; multiple errors in work; work assignments
may need to be re-worked; does not pay attention to detail and accuracy; employee
fails to find own errors; work not completed on time; has been provided with the
resources and support to succeed, but is not able and/or willing to produce the
quality or amount of work required.
Final Scoring
For calculation of final score, the following method may be followed:
1) The Nodal Officer and 3rd party Assessor will calculate the weighted average score
of each staff.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
60% of Work 40% of Knowledge and Total Score
Performance Based Competency Based
Assessment (A) Assessment (B)
Weighted average 60% x (Total average 40% x (Total average C = C.1+C.2
Score of Nodal Officer score in Part A) = C.1 score in Part B) = C.2
(C)
Weighted average Score 60% x (Total average 40% x (Total average D = D.1+D.2
of 3rd Party Assessor (D) score in Part A) = D.1 score in Part B) = D.2
Final Score (C+D)/ 2
All staff who have completed at least 3 months of service in either of the assessment months
should be eligible for performance assessment. All staff who have completed probation period
during the final performance appraisal will be eligible for a remuneration review based on the
performance rating provided by their supervisor. The staff who have completed one year should
get the total increment amount added in their past remuneration and the ones who have not
completed one year will get the remuneration on pro rata basis i.e., total increment amount
divided by 12 months and multiply by the number of months in doing the assignment/job. The
next increment should be done after next year final performance assessment. The person must
complete 3 months’ probation period for any increment in remuneration.
Performance Improvement Plan
The Performance Improvement Plan is designed to give a nonperforming employee a short-term
window period of minimum 1 month and maximum 3 months to level up with the expectations of
the job profile. This can be utilized only in certain specific circumstances as listed below:
• In the event of employee obtaining the rating 1 (rating range 0 to 5) at the end of
annual / yearly performance
• In the event of employee having repeatedly obtained the rating 2 at the end of
several annual/half yearly Performance Reviews (two of such rating in three reviews)
• In the event of a probationer employee having obtained the rating of 1 and therefore
not been confirmed in the first probation period of 3 months
• Employees undergoing Performance Improvement Plan will not be eligible for the
rewards process of that particular Performance Management System cycle.
In case the staff do not secure a rating of 3 for the performance of 1 to 3 months of Performance
Improvement Plan period then the contract with the staff will be ended and will be determined
as per the provision of clause of Termination.


#### [Table Content]
|  | 60% of Work Performance Based Assessment (A) | 40% of Knowledge and Competency Based Assessment (B) | Total Score |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Weighted average Score of Nodal Officer (C) | 60% x (Total average score in Part A) = C.1 | 40% x (Total average score in Part B) = C.2 | C = C.1+C.2 |
| Weighted average Score of 3rd Party Assessor (D) | 60% x (Total average score in Part A) = D.1 | 40% x (Total average score in Part B) = D.2 | D = D.1+D.2 |
| Final Score | (C+D)/ 2 |  |  |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
Staff Member’s Particulars
Name :
Designation :
Date of Joining the Organization :
Date of joining the Current Designation :
Validity of Current Contract :
Activities:
• Distribution of APA forms
• Self-Evaluation
• Appraiser’s evaluation
• Final review by the Reviewer
• Feedback to the personnel
GENERAL GUIDELINES
PURPOSE:
• To assess the performance of a personnel against the Key Deliverables
• To identify personnel’s strength and areas of improvement
• To serve as one among various inputs for career development planning
• To provide inputs for compensation decisions
PROCEDURE FOR EVALUATION:
Self-evaluation: Each personnel will receive the Appraisal forms through his/her immediate
senior officer/reporting officer (here onwards referred as the appraiser). After filling Part- A of
the form, it is to be returned to the appraiser.
Performance Evaluation Dialogue: The appraiser is required to schedule a discussion with the
appraisee for performance evaluation. Performance of the entire period to be reviewed against
agreed deliverables.
Superior Evaluation: After the dialogue, the evaluator will assess the performance of the
appraiseeand put his/her views in Part B of the form.
In case where an appraisee has worked under two or more superiors in the appraisal year, the
appraisal will be done by the one under whom the appraiser has worked for a minimum of three
months (excluding period of long leave by appraisee and or reporting officer
Ideally when a reporting officer/ appraiser is leaving the service of the organization, he/she must
undertake the appraisal of his/her appraisee for that particular appraisal cycle before leaving.
the



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
in Part C.
Feedback to the Personnel: This is a very important step of the cycle whereby the appraise is
given feedback by his appraiser on his annual performance and also about his strength and
areas of improvement. This is to be done after the whole process is over i.e., after appraiser
evaluation and Moderation of scores.
Appraise Comments: The personnel, after receiving the feedback, writes his comments in Part
D and signs the APA forms.
PART – A
SELF EVALUATION
• Please list your key deliverables for the year as specified in the annual work plan initiatives.
Against each deliverable, mention your actual achievements (and constraints, if any).
• Also, mention other deliverables that were assigned / taken up during the course of the
year.
• The below mention format is to be used, but as space would be inadequate, take as many
sheets as required.
S. No. Key Deliverables Achievements
Additional Responsibilities & Other Areas of Contribution (Area which are not covered above)
Please mention constraints in your work during the review period
DELIVERABLES FOR YEAR 20............-............
Key Deliverables:
S. No Deliverables
Signature of the Appraisee: Date:


#### [Table Content]
| S. No. | Key Deliverables | Achievements |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

| S. No | Deliverables |
| --- | --- |
|  |  |
|  |  |
|  |  |
|  |  |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
(TO BE FILLED IN BY APPRAISER)
I. PERFORMANCE SUMMARY AND TREND
(Summarize your view of appraisee’s accomplishmentsand comment on performance trend
during the past year)
II. STRENGTHS
(Describe appraisee’s strengths and how they have contributed to the current assignments)
III. ACTION FOR PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT
(Identity specific areas needing improvement anddevelopment actions you feel would
enhance theappraisee's current or furtherperformance)
PART – C
(TO BE FILLED IN BY APPRAISER)
• Please read the Guidelines for Performance Rating
• Please tick on the rating (whichever and corresponding to the score applicable)
S. No. Part- A (by Part - B (by
Reporting Officer) Reviewer)
(Each Attribute is to be marked; Max. Marks
– 10 for each Attribute)
1. Quality of Deliverables
2. Application of Professional
Knowledge
3. Timeliness of Deliverables
4. Initiative
5. Willingness to shoulder extra
responsibility
6. Attitude
7. Interpersonal Relations &Team work,
Co-operation with Supervisors &
Colleagues, Peer support.
8. Communication Skills (Written &
spoken)
9. Punctuality & Contribution to other
tasks (beyond Division’s work).


#### [Table Content]
| I. PERFORMANCE SUMMARY AND TREND (Summarize your view of appraisee’s accomplishmentsand comment on performance trend during the past year) |
| --- |
| II. STRENGTHS (Describe appraisee’s strengths and how they have contributed to the current assignments) |
| III. ACTION FOR PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT (Identity specific areas needing improvement anddevelopment actions you feel would enhance theappraisee's current or furtherperformance) |

| S. No. |  | Part- A (by Reporting Officer) | Part - B (by Reviewer) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | (Each Attribute is to be marked; Max. Marks – 10 for each Attribute) |  |
| 1. | Quality of Deliverables |  |  |
| 2. | Application of Professional Knowledge |  |  |
| 3. | Timeliness of Deliverables |  |  |
| 4. | Initiative |  |  |
| 5. | Willingness to shoulder extra responsibility |  |  |
| 6. | Attitude |  |  |
| 7. | Interpersonal Relations &Team work, Co-operation with Supervisors & Colleagues, Peer support. |  |  |
| 8. | Communication Skills (Written & spoken) |  |  |
| 9. | Punctuality & Contribution to other tasks (beyond Division’s work). |  |  |




STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
knowledge(papers, presentations,
conferences etc.)
Aggregate Marks (Max. 100)
Average of Marks
Signature of Reporting Officer Signature of Reviewing Signature of Consultant/Staff
Officer
Grade Overall Marks (Please Tick)
A More then 79
B More than 64
C 50 to 64 Repeat Assessment (Mid-Year Review)
D Less than 50 Served notice
Reviewer’s Comments on overall performance & Potential
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HR/Administrative Section:
Integrity / Disciplinary Action / Propriety: (Tick the relevant Choice)
Conduct:
Above Board Questionable
Disciplinary:
Initiated In Progress Completed Findings Not Guilty / Guilty


#### [Table Content]
|  | Aggregate Marks (Max. 100) |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Average of Marks |  |  |

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Signature of Reporting Officer | Signature of Reviewing Officer | Signature of Consultant/Staff |

| Grade | Overall Marks | (Please Tick) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| A | More then 79 |  |
| B | More than 64 |  |
| C | 50 to 64 | Repeat Assessment (Mid-Year Review) |
| D | Less than 50 | Served notice |

| Above Board | Questionable |
| --- | --- |

| Initiated | In Progress | Completed | Findings | Not Guilty / Guilty |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
Officer
Name:
Date :
Note:
1. The appraiserin all cases will be the immediate supervisor
2. The reviewerin all cases will be Functional / Organizational Head of Appraiser
3. In case of difference of opinion between Appraiserand Reviewer in score, the average of
the two will be considered.
PART - D
(FEEDBACK FORM)
1. Part ‘A’ has been taken into consideration while evaluating the Appraisee.
2. Part ‘B’ and ‘C’ have been shown to Appraisee.
Comments of the Appraisee
Comments of the Appraiser
(Signature of the Appraisee) (Signature of the Appraiser)



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
Process of Claiming Expenses (Example- Travel Policy):
y The travel approval by any NHM Staff on the Travel Requisition Form should be
taken from the competent authority i.e., Reporting Head or as designated by the
state specific travel policy.
y A travel advance can be claimed and it may be mentioned in the Travel Requisition
Form or a separate “Travel Advance Form” is to be used for the same. The advance
amount should be based on the estimated cost.
y The travel advance form will be signed by the Reporting Head and send to the
finance division for the further process. The Finance division approved the estimated
cost, then 80% amount should be credited to staff account within 2 working days
y After completing the travel staff must prepared tour report and its will be part of the
claim form, without tour report the settlement will be uphold till it submitted.
y The claim should be made and all advances/ expenses to be settled within a week
of returning from the travel.
y The following attachments are extremely important for claiming the expenses:
> All supporting bills for travel e.g., the ticket/ boarding pass or the train ticket or
a bus ticket
> All bills pertaining to hotel stay
> All bills pertaining to costs incurred on food.
> All bills related to hiring taxi
> All bills related to other expenses
> Tour report
y All reimbursements to be claimed/submitted only on the travel expense form with all
bill details well numbered and attached sequentially.
y If the bills will be not available for expenses incurred on auto/ taxi/ food, please
specify the reason for the same and expenses amount should be written on a blank
sheet and it also self-attested.
y Any amount beyond the maximum limit has to be refunded by the staff member
immediately by cash, cheque or instruction to deduct automatically from the salary
payment of the following month.
y If an employee elects to combine personal travel with a work trip, NHM will reimburse
the cost of direct return travel between posting and work trip destination. Employees
are expected to cover the extra costs.
y If travelling for more than 5 days at a stretch, an employee can claim for a reasonable
amount of laundry
y Is an employee returns back to his place of posting after 1600 hours (4 PM) on a
working day then he/ she could report to work only on the next working day. However,
depending on the workload, the supervisors could take a call whether the employee
is required to be at work or if he/she could report the following day.



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
with his/her supervisor he/ she can claim a day off (Compensatory Off) at any working
day within the week following his/ her return from the trip.
y Cancellation charges would have to be borne by the employee unless otherwise
approved by the Supervisor.
y If any employee misses a flight or a train for reasons beyond his/ her control then
only the loss incurred from the “No show ticket” will be borne by the employer in
any other situation, the employee has to bear 100% cost incurred therein including
booking charges.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
Name :
Designation:
Period of travel: Date (from) (to) ____. No. of days _
Purpose of travel:
__________________________________________________________________________
Budget Head: __HRH ________________________________________________________
Travel date Place Mode of Approximate expenditure (Rs.) Remark (if
travel Travel cost Boarding/ any)
lodging
Estimated expenditure to be incurred by consultant Rs. /-_____
Previous advance (if any): _________ Advance requested (if any): Rs.
Specific approval need for (if any): Air tickets booked by myself of both tickets Hyderabad
__________________________________________________________________________
Submitted for approval please.
Signature of consultant
Date:_______________
Approved By _______________________________________________________________
Remark by Admn/Accounts (if any):


#### [Table Content]
| Travel date | Place | Mode of travel | Approximate expenditure (Rs.) |  | Remark (if any) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  | Travel cost | Boarding/ lodging |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
Date: ………………
Name: ………………………………
Designation: ………………………
Purpose: Meeting / Workshop / Others
Details: …………………………………………………………………………………
.………………………………………………………………………………..
Advance required Rs (in figure) ………………
Rs (in words) …………………………………………………………………………
Previous advance balance (if any) ………………
Signature
Verified by
Budget head - ……………………………………………………………… Approved by
Reporting Officer



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
Name: ………………………………. Designation: ………………………. Date: ………………
Place Distance
Mode of Vehicle Amount
Date Purpose in
travel Number (in Rs.)
From To Kilometre
Total:
(Rupees in words):
Signature of Claimant
Approved by Verified by


#### [Table Content]
| Date | Place |  | Purpose | Mode of travel | Vehicle Number | Distance in Kilometre | Amount (in Rs.) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | From | To |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | Total: |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | (Rupees in words): |  |  |  |  |  |  |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
Requisition No________________________ Date_________________________
Department / Section _______________________________________________
Name of the User___________________________________________________
Date on which vehicle is required ______________________________________
Time________________________ to __________________________________
Place from _______________________________ to_______________________
Purpose of journey __________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
Details of meeting etc. _______________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
Special Instruction (if any) ____________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
Sign of Requisitioner
Designation _____________________
Sign of In-charge personal
__________________________________________________________________
Vehicle may be / may not be provided
Vehicle No _____________________________ provided.
Coordinator (Transport) Administrative Officer



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
PART-A To Be Filled Up By the Personal
1. Name :
2. Designation :
3 Division :
4. Office :
5. Details and purpose of journey(s) performed:
Departure Arrival Mode of Fare Distance Duration Purpose
travel paid in Kms of halt of
and (NHM/ for road journey
class SELF) mileage
Date & From Date & To (Rs)
Time Time
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
6. Mode of journey:
(i) Air
a) Air Ticket Booked (Agency/ State/ Self) Yes/No
(ii) Rail
(a) Rail Ticket booked (Agency/ State/ Self)
(b) Travel by admissible booking. Yes / No
(c) Travel on Tatkal Ticket Yes / No
(iii) Road (Please √)
Mode of conveyance used, i.e., by Office transport/by hiring taxi, /a single seat in a bus or other
public conveyance/by sharing with another person of the same organization in a cab/ personal
car
7. Date of absence from the place of halt on account of RH / CL/ Consolidate Leave during
the tour


#### [Table Content]
| Departure |  | Arrival |  | Mode of travel and class | Fare paid (NHM/ SELF) | Distance in Kms for road mileage | Duration of halt | Purpose of journey |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Date & Time | From | Date & Time | To |  | (Rs) |  |  |  |
| (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (6) | (7) | (8) | (9) |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
financed by the State Fund.
(a) Board only………………
(b) Lodging only…………….
(c) Board and lodging
9. Particulars to be furnishing along with hotel bill etc. for stay in hotel/other establishments
providing board and/or lodging as per entitlement.
Daily rate
Name of of boarding/
Total amount
Period of stay the Hotel/ lodging charged
paid
establishment (Inclusive of all
taxes)
From To
10. Particular of journey(s) for which higher class than the one to which the NHM Personnel is
entitled:
Mode of Class by Fare of the
Entitle
Date Name of Places conveyance which entitled
Class
used travelled Class
From To
If the journey(s) by higher class then the prior approval of the competent authority taken.
11. Details of journey(s) performed by road between places connected by train:
Date Name of Place Fare paid
From To
Date of prior approval of competent authority
12. Amount of Advance, if any, drawn: …………./-


#### [Table Content]
| Period of stay |  | Name of the Hotel/ establishment | Daily rate of boarding/ lodging charged (Inclusive of all taxes) | Total amount paid |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| From | To |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |

| Date | Name of Places |  | Mode of conveyance used | Entitle Class | Class by which travelled | Fare of the entitled Class |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | From | To |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

| Date | Name of Place |  | Fare paid |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | From | To |  |
|  |  |  |  |




STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
The net entitlement on account of Traveling Allowance works out to Rs. ……asdetailed below:
a) Railways/Air/Bus/Steamer fare ………….
b) Total Amount paid on Road travel (between districts ………….
c) Total Amount paid on Accommodation ………….
d) Daily Allowance:
i. ________days @ Rs. ______per day
ii. ________days @ Rs. ______per day
iii. ________days @ Rs. ______per day
e) Local Conveyance/ Others (Specify) …………..
Gross amount ……………
f) Less: Amount of TA advance drawn, if any ……………
g) Previous amount is to be debit able (if any) Rs. ___________
Net Amount Rs. ___________
I certified that the information, as given above, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Signature of the claimant with date
Claim Verified by Authorized person with date
CERTIFICATE FOR TRAVEL CLAIMS
1. Certified that I actually travelled by the class for the T.A. claimed in this bill.
2. I have submitted boarding pass for Air travel. If not then please provide reason and confirm
not submitting to any other organization for claim…………………………….
3. Certified that number of kilometres shown in this bill is in accordance with google map
distance.
4. Certified that I was actually in outstation on Sundays and holidays for which daily allowance
is claimed.
5. Certified that I was not on leave/ weekend during the period for which daily allowance has
been claimed.
6. Certified that I incurred running expenses a personal car in this journey.
7. Certified that the road journeys in entitled class for which kilometre has been claimed
were performed in my own car and approve by appropriate authority. (RTO rates)
8. Certified that the road journeys for which mileage is claimed were performed by road
but were charged by rail in entitlement class. The number of kilometres…………..actually
travelled by road.



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
from hotel regarding occupancy on letter head/ web portal booking is mandatory, if not
then hotel bill should be attached.
Signature of the claimant
Approved by Appropriate Authority
(Signature & Designation of the controlling officer/ supervisor)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For Accounts Section
Scrutinized & Passed Amount…………
Checked by………………
Verified by……………….



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
Process of Applying Leave
Through HRMIS a proper leave management module should be developed for online leave
management and its approval should be granted on it. The individual staff and Reporting Head
can see the updated leave status.
If the leave management on the HRMIS is not functional or under development, following process
should be adopted:
y Each individual is responsible for submitting the leave details in the approved “Leave
Application Form” to Reporting Head and he /she forwarded to nodal officer / in-
charge of Human Resource to make sure the correct amount of leave balance is
maintained. Finally Reporting Head approved the leave on the basis of balance
leave and it's again forwarded to nodal officer / in-charge of Human Resource for
further necessary action.
y In the leave application form the staff needs to submit the contact details where he /
she is visiting and persons’ name holding charge of work for that time period, to the
Reporting Head well in advance.
y In unscheduled absence, it is expected that intimation of leave should be shared
through phone, sms, email etc. by the employee or employee’s other relative or
friend or any one on behalf of the employee to the Reporting Head and nodal officer
/ in-charge of Human Resource definitely within a reasonable time following the
beginning of your scheduled work in the office.
y The monthly leave data of staff of NHM is recorded by nodal / in-charge of Human
Resource after receiving Monthly Attendance Sheets from the respective Reporting
Head. Overall leave record will be maintained by nodal / in-charge of Human
Resource after reconciliation with respective Reporting Head.
* For maternity leave, a separate leave application is to be put up with all related documents.



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
Salaries underNHM should facilitate attraction and retention of talent and therefore offering
competitive salaries is important to attract qualified staff, motivate existing staff and reduce
turnover. Following are essential principles which should be considered while determining an
appropriate salary range for a job:
y Equal pay for equal work should be applicable to all the jobs with adequate
weightage for educational qualification and experience.
y State should ensure that there is parity in salary across various pools (RCH, NRHM,
NUHM, NCD and DCPs) in NHM.
y Minimum wages in each category for all workers must be ensured.
Following points should be considered while determining the compensation and salaries of
NHM Staff:
• The compensation should not be higher than the compensation of the existing staff of
same category and with similar nature of work, qualification and experience. In case,
no such posts exist under NHM, the HR Cell should undertake a market analysis on the
compensation component and put it forward to higher authority for further discussion.
• The compensation and allowances to be paid (if any) to the NHM staff should be as per
the approvals of Record of Proceedings of Programme Implementation Plan. Any deviation
from the same is to be discussed at the level of Executive Committee and Governing Body;
thereafter, it needs to be put forward to MoHFW during National Programme Coordination
Committee (NPCC) for final approval.
• States may determine a range of compensation organised as ‘compensation grades’ for
each staff category depending upon the nature of work required to perform. This should be
commensurate with the educational/other qualifications, skills and experience possessed
by the staff. However, the maximum compensation should not exceed the compensation
approved by GoI in the Record of Proceedings of Programme Implementation Plan.
• The base/ entry level compensation of all staff category may be revised every five years.
It is to be discussed at the level of Executive Committee and Governing Body, thereafter
put forward to MoHFW during NPCC for final approval.
Salary Increment
The Incentive / yearly salary increment should be linked to performance appraisal of the
individual employee. The performance rating should determine the salary increment to be
provided to contractual staff. The following table provides an indicative list for linking service
assessment ratings with the offer of increments.
Table: Year increment based on performance appraisal
Rating Performance Description Increment
5 Exceptional – staff member demonstrates superior performance 10%
greatly exceeding job requirements in all areas.
4 Exceeds job requirements – staff member consistently performs 8%
above job requirements.
3 Satisfactory – staff member performs well in all areas of 5%
responsibility consistently meeting all job requirements.


#### [Table Content]
| Rating | Performance Description | Increment |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 5 | Exceptional – staff member demonstrates superior performance greatly exceeding job requirements in all areas. | 10% |
| 4 | Exceeds job requirements – staff member consistently performs above job requirements. | 8% |
| 3 | Satisfactory – staff member performs well in all areas of responsibility consistently meeting all job requirements. | 5% |




STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
minimum performance levels for all job requirements, needs further
development and training in functional areas.
1 Unsatisfactory – staff member’s performance is inadequate, No Increment/
consistently fails to meet minimum job requirements. Notice /
Termination
In the Record of Proceeding (ROP), in principle 5% of the total HR budget is approved as lump
sum for increment. The increment for individual staff is to be decided by state. It may range from
0% to 10% and should be linked to performance appraisal process.
Salary Payment Process
Each employee should be registered on HRMIS and automated salary calculation process
should be adopted, considering the daily attendance of employeesmonitored through HRMIS.
The monthly remuneration must be calculated on the last day of month. If last day of the month
is a holiday, then it should be calculated a day prior. Disbursement should be done on the 1st
of the succeeding month, and if 1st is a holiday, then it should be disbursed on the next working
day. An employee may also get the monthly pay slip generated through HRMIS.
Any advance taken by the individual employee must be settled prior or shall be adjusted from
the monthly remuneration. The travel expenditure or allowance must be reimbursed within 15
days after submission of bills.
The process should be monitored by the competent authority during the monthly process
meeting.


#### [Table Content]
| 1 | Unsatisfactory – staff member’s performance is inadequate, consistently fails to meet minimum job requirements. | No Increment/ Notice / Termination |
| --- | --- | --- |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
Rationalization of Compensation should be undertaken wherever required.
Compensation of all staff engaged under different programmes under NHM is to be at par
based on nature of engagement, qualification and experience. In case of differences, states
to take adequate steps to rationalise it using rationalization budget approved in the Record
of Proceedings of Programme Implementation Plan. Following steps for rationalization of
compensation
• The Human Resources (HR) under NHM have been brought together under Health
Systems Approach from different programmes. As a first step towards salary
rationalization, all HR are to be grouped together based on qualification required
and task to be performed. E.g., All Lab technicians to be grouped together as Lab
technicians under NHM.
• Similarly, all HR under programme management (across all programmes) are to
be grouped together based on qualification required and task to be performed,
irrespective of the nomenclature provided in different programme guidelines. E.g.,
Accountants approved under different programmes are performing similar task are
to be grouped together.
• Entry level salary is to be determined for each staff category/ group based on years
of experience, qualification and previous relevant experience. E.g., For a consultant
level position, the entry level salary for MBBS+PG qualified candidate will be different
from that of non-MBBS+PG candidate (demonstrated in tabled below).
a) Approximate incremental salary based on years of experience should also be determined,
for programme management staff. In case any candidate selected for any post has
more experience than the minimum required qualification, the same may be take into
consideration for deciding the entry level salary (refer to table below).
Table: Example of determining entry level salary for the position of consultant based
on experience and qualification
Position: Consultant*
Full-time Masters / PG in
Health/ Rural/ Hospital/
Full-time PG / Masters in
Medical Graduate with Other Management
Science / social science
PG Sciences (AICTE
background
Years of Approved regular
Experience course of 2 years)
Salary of Salary of Salary of
existing existing existing
Entry level Entry level Entry level
staff staff staff
Salary Salary Salary
with 5% with 5% with 5%
increment increment increment
0 45000 35000 30000
1 47000 47250 36000 36750 31000 31500
2 49000 49350 37000 37800 32000 32550
3 51000 51450 38000 38850 33000 33600


#### [Table Content]
| Years of Experience | Position: Consultant* |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Medical Graduate with PG |  | Full-time Masters / PG in Health/ Rural/ Hospital/ Other Management Sciences (AICTE Approved regular course of 2 years) |  | Full-time PG / Masters in Science / social science background |  |
|  | Entry level Salary | Salary of existing staff with 5% increment | Entry level Salary | Salary of existing staff with 5% increment | Entry level Salary | Salary of existing staff with 5% increment |
| 0 | 45000 |  | 35000 |  | 30000 |  |
| 1 | 47000 | 47250 | 36000 | 36750 | 31000 | 31500 |
| 2 | 49000 | 49350 | 37000 | 37800 | 32000 | 32550 |
| 3 | 51000 | 51450 | 38000 | 38850 | 33000 | 33600 |




STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
5 55000 55650 40000 40950 35000 35700
6 57000 57750 42000 42000 36000 36750
7 59000 59850 44000 44100 37000 37800
8 60000 61950 40000 46200 30000 38850
*Note: The salary mentioned in the table are indicative
At no point, the salary of the new HR to be higher than the existing staff under NHM with similar
qualification or experience. However, in case state has to revise the entry level salary of certain
staff category, the existing staff may apply for the same position through open recruitment
process and in-case he/ she gets selected, may be paid the revised remuneration. This provision
should be used sparingly and only in cases where the salary levels are very low.
b) While revising the entry level salary for any staff category, market assessment should be
conducted to find out:
i. Availability of candidates with required qualification in the state or region.
ii. Educational institutes/ Colleges in the state or region providing the required course
and their annual intake.
iii. Market rate for the desired qualification.
c) In ROP an additional 3% of the total HR budget is approved as lump sum for HR rationalisation.
This along with the annual increment may be utilised for salary rationalization wherein the
annual increase in salary of staff may be increased up to maximum 15%. However, prior to
salary rationalization process, the qualification, workload and skills of individuals must be
taken into account. In case an individual is at a higher salary level without any difference
in educational experience and workload, may be given lower rate of increment.
The principles of salary rationalization are to be approved by Governing Body (GB) of State
Health Society whereas the details are to be approved by Executive Committee (EC) of the State
Health Society.


#### [Table Content]
| 5 | 55000 | 55650 | 40000 | 40950 | 35000 | 35700 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 6 | 57000 | 57750 | 42000 | 42000 | 36000 | 36750 |
| 7 | 59000 | 59850 | 44000 | 44100 | 37000 | 37800 |
| 8 | 60000 | 61950 | 40000 | 46200 | 30000 | 38850 |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
All necessary contact information/ email ID for grievance redressal should be boldly displayed
at various places of the facility, especially at administrative rooms and Staff rooms. A transparent
drop box for receiving written complaints should also be introduced in areas where it can be
visibly noticed by the Staff and the administration.
Ideally, any complaint/grievance should abide by the following protocol:
Step 1: The person lodging a grievance should provide all relevant details (in writing) to the
nodal person. This could be done online,through an email or a written letter or application. In
case of an emergency, initial contact can be over phone, but a written confirmation should follow
as soon as possible. The concerned nodal person must immediately acknowledge receipt of the
grievance in writing, informing the employee of the receipt of grievance. If the online system is
used, an automated reply should be sent to the employee about registration and a notification
should be sent to the nodal person about receipt of the application.
Step 2: The nodal person should determine whether the grievance relates to local issues/
staff or to the policies of the NHM. In case the grievance relates to local issues or staff, the
nodal person at the facility or institution should determine whether it can be handled under their
jurisdiction or would need to be escalated to District/ State Grievance Redressal Committee.
• The nodal person at facility should try to resolve the grievance at the Facility level
grievance committee through a patient hearing to the aggrieved employee and through
proper counselling or by taking suitable remedial action.
• In case the grievance cannot be handled under the discretion of the Facility level
grievance committee, then facility Nodal person should escalate this grievance to the
District Grievance Redressal Committee, where the district level nodal person should
place it before the committee within seven days of receipt of the grievance. The District
Grievance Redressal Committee should convene, review the grievance and resolve it
within two weeks of the referral of the grievance. The Committee should also provide a
written report to the Facility and State level Grievance Redressal Committee through the
nodal person. The same process should be adopted for the matters that are registered at
State Grievance Redressal Committee.
• In case, the District Grievance Redressal Committee fails to resolve the issue, or the
grievance is beyond its remit, this should be referred by the nodal person to the State
Grievance Redressal Committee within the prescribed period of seven days. The State
Grievance Redressal Committee should convene, review the grievance and resolve it
within two weeks of the referral of the grievance.
• In case, the State Grievance Redressal Committee fails to resolve the issue, or the grievance
is beyond its remit, this should be referred by the nodal person to the Mission Director,
NHM within the prescribed period of seven days. The MD, NHM may place the matter
to Executive Committee of NHM for final decision on the concerned grievances within 1
month.
Each committee should maintain a grievance register with the concerned nodal person as the
custodian of this register. There should be a separate minute book with each of the committees
to record the proceedings (Minutes of Meeting) of all meetings.
All grievances should be attended to promptly in a time bound manner and dealt with utmost
empathy and consideration.
Appeal:
For any appeal against redressal of a grievance of any nature pertaining to NHM employees,
the final authority will be the MD, NHM whose decision will be final and binding.



STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
Employment Separation
Employment separation may be in the form of resignation, dismissal or discharge, suspension,
retrenchment.
Notice Period & Relieving
All staff members will have to abide by the notice period as mentioned in the appointment
letter. Prior to being relieved from employment, he/she shall be required to handover all official
materials in his/her possession,obtain a Clearance Certificate from the concerned division/
office/department, Finance, Administration and Human Resource division, validating the same
before issuing the relieving letter and experience certificate (on request).
Please note that as part of procedural adherence, the following documents must be placed on
record:
1. Resignation letter/end of contract letter
2. Letter of acceptance on resignation/ letter of end of contract – acceptance (Signed
by the respective staff)
3. No dues certificate from the respective division/office/department through the
respective In-charge of those division/office/department
4. Leave status from the HR Division to be documented and sent to Finance to be
processed for Full and Final Settlement.
5. Handing over note to be submitted by the respective staff member to the immediate
supervisor. The same with full documentation and signatures will be forwarded to HR
division.
All the above should be sent well ahead of time so as to obviate administrative and other
delays. Relieving letter, experience certificate and full and final settlement of accounts will be
issued not later than two weeks after the staff member is relieved from service, provided all
other relieving formalities have been completed satisfactorily along with satisfactory hand over.
*In exceptional circumstances (relating to medical or personal emergency etc.), a special
permission may be obtained from the Mission Director of the State to relax/ reduce/ waive off
the notice period.
Exit Interview
All employees exiting are expected to provide advance notice a specified in their appointment
letters. The HR team will then request the employee to initiate ‘No dues’ formalities and will
schedule an in-person or telephonic exit interview.
An exit interview is conducted to enable NHM to understand the reasons for the employee’s
decision to resign and also to solicit feedback from the employee about NHM. The exit interview
provides NHM with an opportunity to improve its processes and systems and hence genuine
feedback from the exiting employee is expected and appreciated.



SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
(Please Note: You can use extra sheets of paper if the space provided is not enough)
CONSULTANT INFORMATION
Name
Date of Joining
Designation
Division / Dept
Head of Division/Dept
Resignation Date Last Working Date
FUTURE CONTACT DETAILS
Apartment/ House No.
Street / Area
City / District State
PIN Code
Phone / Mobile
Number
Email Id
1. Please select the factors which have prompted you to leave us.
S.No. Reason Details (Prioritize If More Than One)
Further studies
1
Health Factors
2
Marriage / Family
3
Better Opportunity / Salary
4
Overseas Opportunity
5
Job Different from expectation
6
Work not challenging
7
Work culture
8
Working Hours
9
More responsibilities
10
Lack of Co-operation
11
Recognition
12
Others: specify
13


#### [Table Content]
| CONSULTANT INFORMATION |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Name |  |  |  |
| Date of Joining |  |  |  |
| Designation |  |  |  |
| Division / Dept |  |  |  |
| Head of Division/Dept |  |  |  |
| Resignation Date |  | Last Working Date |  |

| FUTURE CONTACT DETAILS |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Apartment/ House No. |  |  |  |
| Street / Area |  |  |  |
| City / District |  | State |  |
| PIN Code |  |  |  |
| Phone / Mobile Number |  |  |  |
| Email Id |  |  |  |

| S.No. | Reason | Details (Prioritize If More Than One) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Further studies |  |
| 2 | Health Factors |  |
| 3 | Marriage / Family |  |
| 4 | Better Opportunity / Salary |  |
| 5 | Overseas Opportunity |  |
| 6 | Job Different from expectation |  |
| 7 | Work not challenging |  |
| 8 | Work culture |  |
| 9 | Working Hours |  |
| 10 | More responsibilities |  |
| 11 | Lack of Co-operation |  |
| 12 | Recognition |  |
| 13 | Others: specify |  |




STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
satisfied?
S.No. Expectations Were these expectations met?
3. What according to you are the positive points about the Organisation?
S.No. Positive Points Additional Suggestions
4. What according to you are the negative points about the Organisation?
S.No. Negative Points Suggestions To Address These
5. Where are you joining now and at what capacity? [Company Name, Location, Designation,
Salary]
Undertaking
I hereby undertake that I shall not violate any of the Confidentiality clauses of NHM in future.
Signature:
Date:
Nodal Officer/ In-charge
Human Resources Department
Comments (If Any) -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


#### [Table Content]
| S.No. | Expectations | Were these expectations met? |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

| S.No. | Positive Points | Additional Suggestions |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

| S.No. | Negative Points | Suggestions To Address These |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |




SUGGESTIVE
PROCEDURAL
FORMATS
(Kindly complete this form and ensure clearance from the individual Unit Heads. Then submit the
form to the HR Department for further processing. No salary or relieving letter will be released if
signatures from the respective units are not completed.)
Full Name & Signature: _______________________________________________________
Designation: ___________________________ Division / Department: _____________________
Date of Resignation / Contract End Date: ___________________
Last Working Day: ____________________
DIVISION / ITEM (Please specify REMARKS (Please NAME & SIGNATURE
DEPARTMENT if not indicated) tick if cleared, N/A
for not applicable
and specify others)
REPORTING UNIT • Hand Over Sheet
• Files / Folders
• Passwords
• Softcopy Locations
•Books/Manuals/
Reports
• Others
IT • Email Id
• Laptop / Bag
• Mouse
• Data Card
• Pen drive
• External Drive
• External DVD Drive
• Mobile
• SIM Card
• E file Account
• NIC email ID
LIBRARY • Books / Periodicals
• Others
ACCOUNTS • Advance / Loan
• Other Outstanding


#### [Table Content]
| DIVISION / DEPARTMENT | ITEM (Please specify if not indicated) | REMARKS (Please tick if cleared, N/A for not applicable and specify others) | NAME & SIGNATURE |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| REPORTING UNIT | • Hand Over Sheet |  |  |
|  | • Files / Folders |  |  |
|  | • Passwords |  |  |
|  | • Softcopy Locations |  |  |
|  | •Books/Manuals/ Reports |  |  |
|  | • Others |  |  |
| IT | • Email Id |  |  |
|  | • Laptop / Bag |  |  |
|  | • Mouse |  |  |
|  | • Data Card |  |  |
|  | • Pen drive |  |  |
|  | • External Drive |  |  |
|  | • External DVD Drive |  |  |
|  | • Mobile |  |  |
|  | • SIM Card |  |  |
|  | • E file Account |  |  |
|  | • NIC email ID |  |  |
| LIBRARY | • Books / Periodicals |  |  |
|  | • Others |  |  |
| ACCOUNTS | • Advance / Loan |  |  |
|  | • Other Outstanding |  |  |




STAMROF
LARUDECORP
EVITSEGGUS
ADMINISTRATION • Temporary Pass -
• Keys
• Stationeries
• Others
HR • Resignation Letter
• Notice Period
Recovery
• ID Card
• Others
----------------------------------------------TO BE COMPLETED BY HR DEPARTMENT-----------------------------------
Received On: _____________________________ Received By: ________________________
Relieving Status: _______________________ Relieving Letter Issued On: ___________________


#### [Table Content]
|  | • Keys |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | • Stationeries |  |  |
|  | • Others |  |  |
| HR | • Resignation Letter |  |  |
|  | • Notice Period Recovery |  |  |
|  | • ID Card |  |  |
|  | • Others |  |  |




COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS
II
Compendium of Letters
1. Dated: 19th January, 2015, Competency Based Assessment in
recruitment of HR under NHM



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS
recruitment process



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC
Health facilities



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC
Act, 1952.



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC
under NHM



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC
from Lumpsum Budget



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS
Health systems approach



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC
empanelled recruitment



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS
Availability at Public Facilities



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC
under NHM



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS
Strategies for HR



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC
Programme Management Staff



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SRETTEL
FO
MUIDNEPMOC
the Programme Managers



COMPENDIUM
OF
LETTERS



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
III
Learnings from Other States13
India is a highly diverse country and the nature and spectrum of challenges faced by different
states can be extremely varied in terms of availability of HRH and their capacity building.
However, there are certain commonalities that transcend state borders and thus cross learning
among states can prove beneficial.
Good performing states have done well in the past to reach current level of achievement. Their
success stories can help other states to understand, learn and leap forward as well. The process
of innovation serves as a stepping ladder and should be shared among states as much as
possible.
The State Training Consultant in coordination with the Mission Director should prepare a list of
innovations and best practices across states under specific areas, which could then be replicated
in other states. It is also equally possible that two states with similar challenges would adopt
similar strategies resulting in greater success in one state, and relatively limited success in
another. Therefore, the process of replication should be carried out with due understanding and
contextualizing the innovation in the concerned state, preferably including a visit to witness the
implementation of such innovation and effects in its place of origin.
These learning lessons could also be at intra state level, which should also be explored within
the state.
13 Please visit NHM Website to find more about Innovations: https://nhm.gov.in/index1



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
Health Information Systems: Best
Practices
Introduction
India faces critical human resources shortages for most cadres such as doctors, specialists,
nurses, and midwives. Lack of comprehensive, reliable, and up-to-date data along with an
absence of commonly agreed definitions and analytical tools make the task of managing
the health workforce difficult. Moreover, the available information received through manual
recording systems is usually inadequate to plan activities.
The HRIMS is a centralized repository that stores, processes and manages employee-data such
as skills, capabilities, hiring organization, engagement type (regular/ contractual), salary and
additional information about dependents along with other functions like recruiting, application
tracking, performance appraisals, e-pays slips and leave application relating to all personnel of
the organization. The web-based software supports managerial functions such as master data
management, organizational management- deputing positions and departments, employee
and manager self- services, absence and leave management. The system overall benefits in
the administration, work flow planning and monitoring, performance appraisal, recruiting and
applicant tracking, compensation management, training tracking and basic analytics.
The state of Chhattisgarh funded an in-house Health Resource Information Management System
with support and supervision from National Informatics Centre (NIC) in 2012
Similarly, in Assam the state had two separate information portals i.e., Health Management
Information System (since 2008) and Mother and Child Tracking System (since 2011). There
was discrepancy in similar data being captured through both the software and specific gaps of
information collected for HR data, ASHA related activities, VHND monitoring, financial monitoring,
health infrastructure development etc. To overcome these challenges, the state developed and
implemented an Integrated MIS-GIS System called SwasthyaSewaDapoon in 2018. The system
has been developed using in-house capacity of NHM-Assam and it is hosted in NHM server. The
main goal of the software is to develop and integrate all health-related database within a single
platform.
Part 1: Human Resource Information Management System in Chhattisgarh
Programme Implementation Methodology
A team of software developers under NHM/Chhattisgarh built the web-based HRIMS with
supervision from NIC. NIC hosts the software in its secure servers and is responsible for server
maintenance; the NHM personnel are responsible for software maintenance. The system covers
all staff, both regular and contractual, across the entire state. It captures all official information,
personal information, qualifications, current and past posting details, salary and bank details,
and a monthly attendance sheet updated by the district account manager.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
trained by the IT team to enter the data in the online web portal through an authorized user ID
and password.
Data on regular staff is cross-checked with the official treasury records available with the
Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO). The data of contractual staff is cross-checked with the
NHM database. The CMHO views all the data in the built-in CMHO Dashboard to take informed
decisions on recruitment, deputation and other activities.
Advantages and Scalability
With the help of HRIMS, the mangers can access the information they need to legally, ethically
and effectively support the state employees. Key benefits include:
y Improved HR Planning: the availability of timely and accurate data about the HR
helped in the PIP process, recruitment, rationalization of NHM staff and loyalty bonus
distribution.
y Transparency in the system: Transfer and posting application registration.
y Fast Data Retrieval: Higher speed of retrieval and processing of data application
registration.
y Financial Management: Salary preparation of NHM employee and pay slip
generation.
y Performance Management: Annual appraisal of NHM employee through HRIMS.
Minimal cost has been incurred in setting up the HRIMS in Chhattisgarh. Expenses included the
salaries of the software developers and time cost of NIC staff and employees in data entry and
updating work. The major challenge, however, has been to retain the efficient programming
staff. With in-house software programmers and technical assistance from NIC, the HRIMS in
Chhattisgarh shows potential to be sustainable.
Part 2: SwasthyaSewaDapoon: An Integrated MIS-GIS System in Assam
Programme Implementation Methodology
The strategies adopted during implementation of the system are:
y Single Database Structure: The system was developed in single database structure.
All modules shared the same master tables which makes it easier to integrate the
system and share data among different modules.
y Single entry: In the entire system, one data point will be entered only once. If one
data point is captured in one module, then the same would be shared with other
systems avoiding duplication.
y Open Source Technology: The system has been developed using open source
technology.
y Use of in-house capacity: The system has been developed using in-house capacity
of NHM, Assam and the system is also hosted in the Server of NHM Office.
y GIS-MIS Linkage:
– The GIS Layer: includes 100% GIS mapping, facilitating planning of infrastructure.
– The Masters: includes the updated Human Resource Masters linked with the



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
– The MIS Layer: includes the CHO monitoring, VHND, ASHA payment and
performance monitoring, financial monitoring system, Inventory management
system, Infant death, Maternal death, and Civil Work
Advantages of the HR-MIS System
a) Entire HR database of Health & Family Welfare Department is available on a click of
the mouse.
b) Centralized salary disbursement of 100% NHM employees within the last week of
every month which has increased the motivational level of employees.
c) Salary linked with grading of performance appraisal.
d) Faster recruitment process by using online application module which also helps in
sorting eligible candidates.
e) Online transfer and posting for both employees under state health service and under
NHM which helps in real time updation of information.
f) Transparency of system by publication of HR database in public domain.
g) Transparent posting on merit basis through counselling and on the spot issuance of
appointment letter.
Scalability
• Cost effective: No extra fund was required. The system was developed using in-
house capacity.
• Customized Application: Regular customization as per need.
• Compatibility: Easy compatibility and integrated with NIN.
• Utilized services of PFMS for DBT payment.
Programme Implementation Challenges
The Computerized information system offers various benefits but there are plausible challenges
in scaling up:
a) States where NIC is supporting the process will not incur any additional costs except
for staff time and training but third party involvement may invite a one-time set-up
cost for hardware (purchase of server, computer, antivirus and other equipment) and
software (server license, server software, etc.) which will also add on the costs on
maintenance capacity in future, as continuous external funding will be required.
b) There is a need to assess the competency of staff for maintaining the software. If the
personnel designing HRIMS are not competent enough, there can be a mismatch
between data provided by the HRIMS and data required by the managers.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
Health: The Madhya Pradesh
Experience
Introduction
Accountability in healthcare delivery system relates to three general categories i.e.financial,
performance and political. Financial accountability encompasses tracking and reporting on
allocation, disbursement, and utilization of financial resources by using the tools of auditing,
budgeting, and accounting. Performance accountability refers to demonstrating and accounting
for performance by setting minimum performance benchmarks focusing on services, outputs,
and results. Political accountability is related to the public health institutions, procedures, and
mechanisms that fulfill the public trust, represent citizens’ interests and respond to societal
needs and concerns.
Madhya Pradesh, in 2016-17, established the process of backtracking the cases of severe
anaemia and eclampsia and intended to ensure accountability of the health service providers
towards highly professional and outcome oriented practices. The Intervention was aimed at
creating avenues to expect higher professional standards from the health service providers right
from the level of the ANMs and to fix accountability for better outcomes.
Methodology
1. Identification of Poor Performing ANM
Tracking of ANMs was done in case of late referral of severe anaemia (Hb) and eclampsia
cases or maternal deaths reported due to these causes. District and block level teams
investigated for any negligence on the part of ANM with respect to diagnosis and treatment
during ANC for the particular cases.
2. Capacity Building of the ANMs
In case of negligence, ANM together with the RCH officer and MCH Consultant/DPHNO/
DCM of district were called at the State office for two days on their own expenses. Day-1
was dedicated for review of all documents/case sheets by the state committee and day-2
for capacity building through intensive training on core skills at skills lab, Bhopal.
3. Regulatory Measure
Actions in the form of show cause notice and withholding of increments were recommended
by the state and were ensured by district head quarter.



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
The post training assessment of ANMs was done by Clinton Health Access Initiative to
assess the competency of the ANM.
Programme Outcome:
The Back Tracking has taken roots into the system of setting professional standards and
monitoring has started in the districts. The district authorities have taken cognizance of the
cases and fixed responsibilities of the erring ANMs who have been found negligent. The
practice standard across the state has significantly improved and the quality of care has shown
advancement as revealed by patient satisfaction levels.
Challenges
The major gaps identified during backtracking the ANMs were lack of data reporting, supervisions,
treatment and ANC visits. A total of 84 show cause notices were issued in 2016-17 and 4 ANMs
were terminated during that period.
Scalability
• The project ensures accountability and responsibility of human resources towards
the beneficiary as well as the system without any excessive financial burden to the
system. Further the capacity building component allows for error corrections thereby
strengthening the quality of service delivery.
• The continuum of learning is maintained by organizing trainings and courses which
support continuous professional education, mentorship programmes, adherence
to the protocols and guidelines developed by the state and establishing a good
communication strategy with other professionals, settings and patients by using
appropriate language and communication channels.
• It is important to be patient; successful accountability interventions call for long time
periods and long-haul engagement. Those who promote increases in accountability
must adjust their expectations of time horizons to match a strategic and dynamic
reform process. Even effective accountability interventions that may yield relatively
quick results seem to need a broader, sustained set of changes over a longer period
to ensure that those gains are not lost.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
for Health in Remote and Difficult
Areas
The urban rural disparity is stark when it comes to the availability of skilled HRH with availability
doctors in urban areas four times more as compared to tribal areas. To overcome the shortage
of health workers in rural and remote areas, various states such as Odisha and Chhattisgarh
undertook a series of systematic and progressive reforms that seek to identify the existing
bottlenecks and imbalances in the health systems that affect the human resources.
Part 1- Odisha’s Approach in Attracting and Retaining HR
Programme Methodology:
1. Robust HR Policy:
The state established a State Human Resource Management Unit (SHRMU). This led to the
restructuring of the Odisha Medical Service Cadre and paved the way for career pathway
for HRH and creation of new posts. The revamping of the public health service was done by
creating a separate public health cadre. The formation of the directorate of Public Health
was established to focus on public health improvements and the Directorate for Nursing,
with Programme Management Units had been set up to enable, professional growth for
nurses.
2. Expansion of Scope for Production of Clinical HR:
To increase the intake capacity of Govt. Medical Colleges, the state government partnered
up with private sector. The state government also strengthened the production of quality
nurses by creating a scholarship scheme for ST/ SC students for GNM and BSC Nursing
and comprehensive skill lab at selected nurse training schools with NHM support for skill
enhancement. Laboratory technicians were preferentially selected from graduates of
state government institutes. Retired doctors below 68 years of age are being utilized in
the system on a contractual basis.
3. Priority in Difficult Areas:
Financial incentives for medical officers in the periphery and district hospitals, such as
geographical area allowance, specialist allowance, and post mortem allowance have
been introduced. The state also has provision for in-service deputation for doctors to
PG courses and additional marks in PG entrance exam for doctors working in specific
institutions or areas.



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
The state government has grouped districts into zones; norms for transfer and posting of
doctors after a three-year tenure has been drawn up to ensure availability and retention
of doctors in remote and rural areas of the state.
5. E-Counselling
Institution wise list of vacancies and merit list of candidates are made available on the
website. Counselling and choice locking is done as per the rank of the candidates in the
merit list. Priority list is prepared based on weighted score as per years of services in type
of districts / institutions.
Advantages
• In 2015-16, state witnessed a substantial decrease in vacancies of doctors in KBK+
districts from 45.51% to 32.75%
• Significant improvement in MCH indicators and an increase in outpatient and inpatient
loads, institutional deliveries, and C-section rates.
• Financial implications corpus fund of Rs. 11 Crores was allocated for KBK and KBK plus
districts @ Rs. 1 crore per district to be used for gap filling and to provide support to
service providers for accommodation, mobility and communication related expenses
- based on local context.
Part 2- Recruiting and Retaining Specialists and other HRH—Bijapur
Model, Chhattisgarh
Bijapur district in Chhattisgarh is a naxalism affected area. 74% of the population is tribal and
the area did not have any private medical practitioner. Given the geographical limitations, no
incentives to HRH were provided and lack of equipment, irregular medicine supplies and poor
general facility upkeep made the scenario of service delivery even worse.
In 2015, the Directorate of Health Service (DHS) and National Health Mission collaborated with
UNICEF to conceptualize a project to strengthen the health care delivery services in the districts
of Bijapur and Sukma.
A planned approach of policy change, advancing technical support to the existing human
resource and intensified strategies to attract specialist doctors was initiated in these regions.
Consultative workshops were organized with various stakeholders at state and district level. The
recommendations made through these workshops were contextualized to develop a lucrative
incentive package for the region.
Programme Methodology:
1. Ensuring the availability of residential facilities for the health workers: Under the
duration of 4 months, the state government was able to complete the construction of
staff quarters.
2. Filling up the vacancies: The recruitment of support staff was completed during June-
July, 2016.
3. Improving infrastructure: State prioritised the refurbishing of facility infrastructure,
especially the blood bank, pathology lab, mortuary, OT, OPD and Wards.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
planned by the state to attract the health workers.
5. Attracting Specialists: Differential salaries with additional incentives based on
place of posting, policy reforms like preferred place of transfer after serving a fixed
tenure, compulsory rural postings for new recruitments, benefits for family such as
facilitation for education of children, accommodation for family in any city within
the state, amenities like recreation facilities and transit hostel for specialist doctors,
academic incentives etc were made available.
Advantages
1. The state was able to fill positions for medical staff and specialists, reducing the
vacancy by 10% and 15% respectively in one year. Infrastructural improvements and
lucrative packages resulted in retention of staff which in turn improved quality and
range of services being provided in these facilities.
2. The local available resources- NHM untied funds and other grants such as, Backward
Region Grant Fund, District Mineral funds and Integrated Action Plan grants, CSR funds
etc were utilized for strengthening infrastructure (medical as well as recreational) and
HR incentives. Social Media platforms were used along with print media to achieve
maximum coverage of advertisement in minimum costs.
Scalability
Given the efficient usage of resources, the model shows potential and is being advocated for
further scale up.



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
of Human Resources in NHM,
Madhya Pradesh
Introduction
In 2015, Madhya Pradesh undertook a systematic process of performance management of
contractual NHM staff to overcome the challenges of unequal distribution of HR, irrational
deployment and staff redundancy. These issues were hampering the HR management and
planning, leading to duplication of work, lack of synergy and ad-hoc recruitment and postings
of regular and contractual staff.
The main objective for implementing the Performance Management System in the state was
to streamline the annual appraisal and to rationalize the human resource for health in the
state. Through this process, the state aims for optimum utilization of existing cadres, elimination
of redundant positions, retention of trained manpower from terminated cadres by way of
redeployment, multi-tasking and integrated services approach for cadres such as lab technicians
and counsellors, upgrading/downgrading of positions based on skill sets, contract renewal,
termination of contracts of surplus and/or nonperforming staff, identifying gaps in existing staff
performance, developing need specific training programmes and encouraging positive work
environment.
Methodology
The methodology of implementing performance management system involved various phases:
1. Planning:
Establishing Performance Management Criteria: At State-level, programme heads were
authorised for monitoring and evaluation. The committees were formed to develop the
criteria to judge adequate performance by the employees. These guidelines were then
circulated in advance to enable preparedness of the appraisers and the contractual staff.
2. Developing
Communicating Performance Standards: Appraisal formats were prepared in Hindi and
English and were designed to assess the knowledge and skills of the workforce. Self-
Declaration formats with information regarding residence, disciplinary issues/court cases
were also shared.
3. Performing
Measuring the actual Performance of Employees: The technical cadres were assessed for
knowledge and competencies by appraisal teams from other districts at the district level.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
teams for LTs, 51 teams for pharmacist comprising selected staffs from all the district). The
teams were oriented on how to conduct the appraisal. The programme management unit
was appraised at the state-level committee comprising representatives of their programme
officers.
4. Review:
Discussion of result with employees: To encourage transparency and reduce bias, a
provision for appeal after declaration of results was also introduced so that staff could
appeal to the next level of authority.
Making the correct decision: The contracts of those with a performance mark of 65% and above
were renewed for a year, those obtaining between 55% and 64% were given a three-month
notice to improve performance and those with less than 54% were given termination notices.
Table 1: Appraisal teams
Team Members Total Team
Cadre
DHO-1, DPHN, BMO, Nursing Tutor/Nursing sister/ 51
ANMs
staff nurse
Pathologist/ MO Lab In-Charge, BMO, Senior LT 51
Lab Technicians
Store I/C MO/BMO, Pharmacist grade-1, Store I/C 51 Pharmacists
pharmacist/Senior pharmacist
Director, NHM, Director, Finance, NHM, Dy. Director, 1 Team
DPMU
NHM, SIO
Director, NHM, Executive Director, SHSRC, Dy. 1 team
SPMU
Directors – of various Programmes
Programme Outcomes
y Goal-Based Approach: The process of appraising and rationalization of HR helped in
linking the NHM goals with individuals’ performance goals.
y Transparency in appraisal: It provides the essential information to help managers
in making informed decisions regarding contract renewals, redeployment and
increments.
y Optimum utilization of funds: After implementing performance appraisal and
rationalization in 2015-16, state was able to save around 140 crores from the HR
budget, which is almost equivalent to 75% of its annual medicine procurement
budget, without sabotaging service delivery.
y Uniformity across the state and better contract management: The HR cell had clear
record of health workers posted in the facilities across the state.
y Performance-based Incentives: Overall 5% of staff were classified as poor performers
and 5% as excellent, 70% as Good performers, 10% as average performers and 10%
as very good performers.


#### [Table Content]
| Cadre | Team Members | Total Team |
| --- | --- | --- |
| ANMs | DHO-1, DPHN, BMO, Nursing Tutor/Nursing sister/ staff nurse | 51 |
| Lab Technicians | Pathologist/ MO Lab In-Charge, BMO, Senior LT | 51 |
| Pharmacists | Store I/C MO/BMO, Pharmacist grade-1, Store I/C pharmacist/Senior pharmacist | 51 |
| DPMU | Director, NHM, Director, Finance, NHM, Dy. Director, NHM, SIO | 1 Team |
| SPMU | Director, NHM, Executive Director, SHSRC, Dy. Directors – of various Programmes | 1 team |




LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
The exercise was conducted in the state for the first time in 2015, within a time frame of less than
60 days. Initially, the state came across various challenges:
y Lack of communication and different level of understating across the appraisal team.
y Difficulty in developing TORs and appraisal formats.
y Slippage in schedules and timelines.
Scalability
Once the process is institutionalized and the challenges addressed, this approach has significant
scaling up and sustainability potential since it is conducted within the existing system by existing
staff.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
Shared Leadership- Banka Model
of Bihar
Introduction
The WHO Integrated People Centred Health Service framework advocates for strengthening
governance and accountability through improving policy dialogue as well as policy formulation
and evaluation together with citizens, communities, and other stakeholders. It is about promoting
transparency in decision-making and generating robust systems for the collective accountability
of policy-makers, managers, providers, and users through aligning governance, accountability,
and incentives.
A person-centred care approach has been implemented in Banka district, Bihar in 2019 to
overcome various health system challenges such as unavailability of assured services especially
C-Section (Low C section rate 1.02%) due to lack of competent HR, low staff accountability,
suboptimal utilization of HR and low patient satisfaction. The key objective of the programme
was to enhance the quality of services by strengthening the leadership and governance.
Programme Implementation Methodology
• Quality Improvement: Continuous quality improvement programme was initiated
at the district hospital in collaboration with Bihar State Health Society. Hospital
Leadership and frontline workers participated in Continuous Quality Improvement
(CQI) from February 2018 to May 2019. The key strategies adopted in this programme
focussed on behaviour change such as:
o Enhancing empathy and sensitivity of service providers to ensure person centric
services.
o Improving ability to oversee quality and safety in hospital leadership in patient
care specific to mothers and newborn.
o Developing and improving the understanding of quality improvement principles
and tools.
o Lead data driven quality improvement activities.
o Effective coaching and engaging of all hospital staff towards delivering effective
health services.
o Optimal utilization of available resources including HR, supplies, fund, etc. for
person centered healthcare and to generate high client satisfaction.
y Leadership and Strategic Management:
o The leadership and coaching workshops were conducted to ensure commitment
and accountability from civil surgeons, medical superintendents, District



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
of a coach.
o The frontline staff and leadership were sensitized on system thinking and
collaboration. Labour room nurses were encouraged by hospital leadership
through shared leadership report complications, LAMA, referrals, near misses
without fear so that further corrections and amendments could be made.
o Hospital staff participated in learning sessions for clinical training, data analysis,
progress review, cross learning, experience sharing, etc.
y Staff Motivation and Improving Working environment:
o Consistent engagement and regular interaction between the entire team
encouraged the health workers.
o Storytelling of real experiences, felicitation of champions and engaging with all
team members over tea on a weekly basis nurtured an informal relationship
and strengthened team work.
o Information on patient rights was played on Audio Visual system.
o Key messages for mothers and families were displayed on TV in hospital’s
waiting area.
y Transparency: Results were shared with all the team members on both good and bad
patient stories.
y Optimum Utilization of Human Resource:
o Duty rosters for all staff were prepared and publicly displayed for transparent
and timely rotation of duties.
o To deal with shortage of skilled HR, specialists from district hospital in nearby
CEmONC centres were deputed to peripheral facilities and vice versa.
Programme Advantages
C-section rate improved from the baseline median of 1% and achieved the monthly target of 5%
from January 2019 to May 2019. Patient satisfaction surveys scored an average 84 out of 100
marks in the month of July 2019. It was concluded that high impact leadership behaviours by
hospital leadership and staff with support from District Health Society and Civil Surgeon were
important key enablers for improvement in services.
Programme Scalability
Positive results from this programme indicate a potential for scaling up the programme in
other areas. Providing clear guidelines and standard measurement tools will help in improving
accountability of facilities and supporting providers in understanding how to provide person-
centred care. Furthermore, moving towards person centred care has no financial implications.
Programme Challenges
y Defining the key stakeholders and identifying the goals of person-centred health
care.
y Motivating the stakeholders for effective communication across the system.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
outcomes.
y Improving the technology for accessing healthcare data and information.
y Developing sustainable and effective models of public health prevention and
promotion.
y Developing strategies for community engagement.



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
and Learning
Introduction
Strengthening of the public health capacities is essential for Universal Health Coverage. The
National Health Policy of India, 2017 has proposed for the creation of a separate public health
cadre for development and functioning of the health system. The public health interventions are
delivered by multidisciplinary functionaries from the community level to higher administrative
levels. Except for a few states, these functionaries are not organized into a separate,
systematically trained public health cadre. In addition, the absence of a comprehensive Public
Health Act in most states means that public health officials lack the regulatory authority and
powers to enforce public health legislation adequately. The lack of a separate public health
directorate further compromises their independence, effectiveness, and efficiency.
Some states have demonstrated remarkable commitment in strengthening the healthcare
delivery system by establishing public health cadres and are making concerted efforts in this
direction. The learning and experience sharing will further help other states which are still
contemplating issues such as its institutional framework, effectiveness, utility, and governance
arrangements.
Part 1: Public Health Cadre in Maharashtra
Programme Design and Implementation
y Directorate of Health Services: Structure and Functioning
– Selection and appointment of doctors as MOs who are posted based on their
educational qualifications since 2011.
– The career pathway for medical officers is defined in three cadres as per their
qualification i.e., District Health Officer cadre, Civil Surgeon cadre, and Senior
Clinician cadre
– There is a common seniority of DHO/CS/Clinician cadres for being promoted to
Deputy Director followed by Joint Director, Additional Director and Director of
Health Services
• Benefits of Public Health Cadre:
– Implementation of primary healthcare is responsibility of public health
specialists, resulting into a strong primary care in the state.
– Health Management Information System, Maternal Death Review, Child Death
Review are integrated with the public health system which leads to smooth
functioning and accountability in health sector.
– Effective response in disease surveillance, epidemic control, control of emerging
and re-emerging diseases.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
monitoring and evaluation of all health programmes.
Part 2: Public Health Cadre in Odisha
Programme Design and Implementation
• Directorate of Health Services: Structure and Functioning:
– Restructuring the Odisha Medical and Health Service Cadre and making
provisions for medical officers to join public health stream.
– Supporting capacity building of MOs in public health and ensuring that
specialists are not posted in public health positions
– Creating dedicated public health positions at block level and above.
– Finalization of recruitment rules, including criteria and qualifications of those
who wish to join public health cadre.
– Development of clear rules for promotions, leave and posting for the cadre.
• Benefits
– Effective planning, implementation and monitoring of public health activities
including various National Health Programmes.
– Improved provision of clinical care services and better utilization of public
hospitals.
– Increase in the number of medical professionals choosing to join government
services due to creation of more promotional avenues for doctors at higher
level.
Part 3: Public Health Cadre in Tamil Nadu
Programme Design and Implementation
• Directorate of Health Services: Structure and Functioning:
– State has a separate Directorate of Public Health and Preventive Medicine
functioning since 1923.
– At all levels, Public Health qualified professionals head the department right
from Municipal Health Officer to Deputy Director of Health Services at the
district, programme officers at the state and the Director of Public Health and
Preventive Medicine at the top.
– Recruitment is through TNPSC or by transfer of service from PHC MOs with five
years of service and public health qualification.
– DPH or MD Community Medicine or MCI recognized MPH with basic MBBS
qualification is compulsory, in case not, it is mandatory to acquire such
qualification in four years of joining service.
– There is a dedicated entomology cadre from junior entomologist to Chief
entomologist at state HQ.
– State Bureau of Health Intelligence is equipped with dedicated cadre of
statisticians.



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
– Three months pre-service training is given to all the health workers.
– Institute of Public Health, established in 1930s, provides all the required training.
• Benefits
– The public health trained cadre adopts an annual cycle of anticipatory planning
for responding to potential natural disasters such as floods and cyclones.
– Vaccine Preventable Diseases have been controlled to a large extent.
– Long years of service provide both knowledge stability and administrative stability
to the employee.
– Significant improvements in demographic indicators.
Scalability
The experience of Maharashtra, Odisha and Tamil Nadu depict the advantages and feasibility
of establishing their own public health cadre. The models are easily replicable across states
and require minimum restructuring or disruption at block, district, and state level. Creation of
public health cadre was affordable and only required an additional investment for training the
professionals in the three states.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
Mentoring Programme - Bihar 14
Introduction
Reducing maternal and child mortality is among the most important goals of the National Health
Mission. Public facilities for childbirth in Bihar must sustain minimum standards of quality of care
to ensure safe birth outcomes. Most deliveries in public facilities are conducted by ANMs and
GNMs. Maternity-benefit driven strategies have increased the utilization of public facilities for
delivery and they currently conduct 65% of all deliveries.
There are serious obstetric skill deficits amongst nurses. Pre-service training and SBA training
are insufficient in improving the quality of intra-partum care to desirable standards. It is unlikely
that sufficient numbers of skilled nurses will be recruited in the conceivable future, and without in-
service training of available nurses, intra-partum care is unlikely to result in reducing preventable
perinatal deaths. Furthermore, the number of nurses in position is too small to permit prolonged
offsite training.
Nurse mobile mentoring programme provides a platform for in-service, onsite mentoring of
available nurses in public facilities by qualified mobile nurse mentors.
Methodology
The nurse mentoring programme is embedded in the Quality Improvement process of the State.
It is implemented by the Bihar Technical Support Programme (BTSP). The programme was
implemented in a phase-wise manner. Initially, a pilot programme was run in 32 designated
BEmONC level facilities in 8 districts during 2012-2013. This was then upscaled to 48 more
facilities including 8 CEmONC level facilities in the same districts during 2013-2014. Finally, for
the state-wide scale-up, 320 more BEmONC facilities and 56 more CEmONC level facilities were
integrated in this programme during 2015-2017.
The pedagogy of learning comprised of iterative training and incremental learning systems
delivered through teams of graduate and post-graduate nurses to the nurses working at
different health institutions. Clusters of 6-8 staff nurses were made in each facility, including all
available GNMs and additional ANMs selected by the concerned block/district hospital. They
got exposure with a pair of mobile nurse mentors with experience in obstetric nursing for one
week a month for a total of 6-8 months. The nurse mentors used a combination of bedside
teaching (in the labour room on actual delivery cases), simulations (using inexpensive equipment
for teaching complex skills such as managing maternal and neonatal emergencies), and theory
to emphasize the rationale for each protocol and process. The process aimed to incrementally
improve the quality of care until desired outcomes were achieved in the facility.
A carefully planned curriculum defined learning goals for each week. The programme course
covered all basic practices in infection control, intra-partum, postpartum maternal and neonatal
14 Since 2018, the programme has been remodeled as AMANAT Jyoti and has been expanded to test the model with doctors as
well.



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
address the challenges and for supportive supervision, the mobile nurse mentors were overseen
by master nurse mentors who hold an M.Sc. in obstetric nursing.
The progress of facilities and individual student nurses were monitored and evaluated regularly.
Advantages and Scalability
• Programme data shows significant improvement in the quality of services:
o Oxytocin administration for Active Management of Third Stage of Labour(AMTSL)
improved from 8.6% to 58.5%.
o Initiation of Kangaroo Mother Care increased from 30.9% to 62.5%.
o Use of sterile instruments increased from 13.0% to 43.5%.
• Besides the routine Government of Bihar finance allocation and PIP support from
NHM for infrastructure and supplies, only the direct costs of recruiting, deploying and
managing the nurse mentors have been borne by CARE/SRU budgets. It is estimated
to cost Rs. 1300 per trainee per day assuming there are 8 trainees per faculty and 7
weeks training per trainee.
• This programme has already gone to full scale in Bihar in 5 years. The GOI has
allocated a budget head in the State PIP for its funding.
Challenges
Two potential barriers exist:
• First, although the rationale behind the recommended practices is discussed during
the training, some nurses are not entirely convinced about the effectiveness of
changed practices. These nurses probably feel more confident about following the
prevailing practices or the practices that they learned in their training schools.
• Second, many nurses, because of their busy schedules, want to get over with
conducting the childbirth process quickly. However, some of the recommended
practices meant that a considerably longer time had to be invested per delivery,
which was not acceptable to all participating nurses.
The model is effective in improving all aspects of quality of care but needs complete ownership
by the leadership at the block and district level to sustain.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
LSAS- Uttar Pradesh
Introduction
It is imperative to acknowledge the gaps in existing infrastructure and specialist manpower at
FRUs and undertake their re-organisation. It is also crucial to ensure the provision of quality
Emergency Care Services at the district hospital and sub-district hospital followed by FRUs/
CHCs. It is preferable to develop FRUs in a district by ensuring that they have the required
number of specialists in position or the provision of services of specialists on call. The information
on location of such emergency services/FRUs should be made available to all villages in the
area so that the population knows where they should reach for getting appropriate emergency
care. The provision of emergency care must be supported by appropriate referral services from
sub-centres to PHCs and from PHCs to the functioning First Referral Units providing emergency
services.
Though MMR and IMR in Uttar Pradesh has declined over the years, the state still accounts for
second highest MMR and thirst highest IMR in the country. Majority of these deaths could be
averted by ensuring comprehensive obstetric care services through FRUs. However, out of 305
designated FRUs in UP, only 98 are functional. Also 64% of Specialists posts are vacant. As per
NFHS data, the proportion of C-section reported in public facilities has declined from 11.1% to
4.7% in past 10 years.
In view of the issue, the state is focusing on operationalization of 291 FRU1 by 2020. In order to
do so, a detailed gap assessment was conducted to identify non-functional FRUs (without a pair
of Anaesthetist & Gynaecologist or those not performing adequate number of C-sections). To
activate the non-functional FRUs, the government of Uttar Pradesh applied the strategy of task
shifting through Buddy-Buddy Model of EMOC and LSAS trained doctors. The model has proven
to be useful in training and orienting the doctors and improving their knowledge and skills in
providing quality obstetric care.
Programme Methodology
A “Buddy-Buddy Counselling Session” was conducted for LSAS and EMOC trained doctors.
The doctors were given an option to choose their preferred FRUs. Priority was given based on
seniority to doctors to choose from the list.
• Identification of Buddy: The counselling session helped in identifying the Buddy. The
Buddy-Buddy group included a pair of LSAS and EMOC trained doctors (Buddy 1)
clubbed with a pair of Anaesthesiologist and Gynaecologist (Buddy 2). During the
first round of counselling, 47 buddy-doctors were identified, and transfer orders were
released within 15 days.
• Training and Capacity Building: The LSAS and EMOC trained buddy-doctors
were posted at DH for 6months under mentorship of specialists (Anaesthetist-
Gynaecologist). During this period, they assisted the specialists in C-section cases



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
supervision.
• Performance Incentives: The performance of the buddy-doctors was also linked to
incentives:
o Incentives during Mentoring Period: Rs 1000 per buddy-doctor and specialists
(mentors) for maximum of 5 C-section per month.
o Team Incentives post-mentoring period at Inactive FRUs: Rs 1200 per doctor, Rs
600 for MBBS Doctor supporting in Post-op, Rs 600 per staff nurse and Rs 400
per OT Technician for all C-sections performed in the FRU.
o Incentives for visiting FRUs by Specialist Mentors after Mentoring Period: Rs
2500 per specialist per visit.
Required equipment was made available to provide suitable work environment to the doctors.
• Final Postings: At the end of 6 months, the doctors (Buddy 1) were posted back to
their respective FRUs after receiving recommendation by the Anaesthesiologist and
Gynaecologist (Buddy 2).
• Support from Government of India:
o Legal Indemnity by the state for all the C-sections being performed by the
doctors.
o Preferred choice of postings in FRUs.
o Exemption from intra-inter district transfers for 5 years.
Programme Outcomes
• 80 FRUs have been activated through two rounds of counselling for buddy-buddy
model.
• Another 100 FRUs are aimed to make functional by 2020 which would potentially
activate 130 out of 153 non-functional FRUs.
Scalability
• Buddy-Buddy Model is a medium term, low-cost, replicable solution to meet the
shortage of specialists in the states of our country.
• The model is scalable and can be implemented in other states, especially those not
having specialist cadre.



SETATS
REHTO
MORF
SGNINRAEL
(P4P)
Introduction
Contract management is the backbone of every relationship that an organization has with
stakeholders including suppliers, partners, and beneficiaries and effective contract management
can dramatically improve the performance of the organization.
In Odisha, all contractual manpower is engaged through Odisha State Health & Family Welfare
Society for a contractual term of 11 months and their contract renewal is subject to satisfactory
performance. Lack of defined hierarchical structures, uneven remuneration of staff, not
commensurate with their qualifications, experience and level of posting and lack of standardised
reporting pathways lead to dissatisfaction among the staff. In addition, lack of defined job
responsibilities for different levels of staff also posed difficulty in objectively evaluating their
performance for contract renewal.
In year 2009-10, the state devised new hierarchical structure and also developed an effective
Performance Management System (PMS) for all positions under Programme Management
Unit. PMS serves as a useful tool for contract renewal, determining staff compensation based
on performance grades and training need identification. The objective of the programme is
to develop hierarchical structure for contractual staff based on level of posting, experience,
job responsibilities and qualifications and define structured reporting pathways for all staff
categories as well as to standardize fixed base remuneration based on hierarchy level.
Programme Methodology
The aim of the programme was to define terms of reference and to identify objectively verifiable
deliverables for performance-linked appraisal and grading of incentives for different staff
categories. Performance Management System has a unique built-in mechanism of two-way
communication for providing constructive feedback from appraisers to appraisee. The Pay for
Performance component (P4P) propels higher performance and is key strategy for improving
capacity/productivity of HRH. It is applicable for both service delivery and programme
management HR.
The P4P system comprise of:
• HR Rationalisation: Prior to 2014-15 there were more than 13 slabs of hierarchy with
variations in remuneration. All the positions were brought under seven slabs with
distinct levels of qualification, experience, responsibility and level of posting. All the
newly created positions are also fitted in into this structure. State level HR committee
is headed by MD-NHM.
• Blended payment system: The total compensation of the contractual staff is divided
into three parts; 75% is the base renumeration, added with fixed 5% annual increment
and 20% Performance Incentive which is a variable cost.



LEARNINGS
FROM
OTHER
STATES
marks with defined Core Performance Indicators (CPI). HMIS, FMR and other reporting
platforms act as means of verification for each identified CPI. The PAR flows through
3 layers of reporting structure i.e., Reporting, Reviewing, and Accepting Authority.
The State Contract Renewal Committee and District Contract Renewal Committee
act as grievance redressal forums.
• Career Progression: The staff gets an opportunity for in house recruitment and state
level committee decides on the positions to be opened up for the entry of existing
employees through in house recruitment. There is the provision of sponsorship for
courses for capacity building such as PGDHQM and MPH.
• Welfare Measures: NHM Employees Welfare Fund works on nominal contributions
collected from all employees under NHM for augmenting corpus fund. The committee
is constituted at SPMU to examine and recommend payment. The state has provision
for difficult area allowance and also conducts annual health check-ups of employees
over 40 years of age.
Programme Outcome
No independent evaluation has been conducted so far. However, substantial improvement in
fund absorption capacity under NHM has been observed with over two-fold increase to Rs.
1362.49 Crores FY 2017-18 from Rs 635 Crores in 2010-11. Significant reduction in staff turnover
has also been observed after introduction of the process.
Scalability
• No additional investment incurred for development of hierarchical structure and
performance management system. However, annually, about Rs. 60 Crores are
allocated towards performance incentives for about 4000 Programme Management
Unit Staff and about 11,000 Clinical & Para-Medical staff working under NHM.
• With the staff positions under PMU largely similar across the states, the process may
be replicated in other states based on their state specific context.















