


Emergency Triage
Assessment
and
Treatment
(ETAT)
Manual for
For further information, please contact:
Department of Child and Adolescent Health and Development (CAH)
World Health Organization
participants
20, Avenue Appia
1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 791 2632
Fax: +41 22 791 4853
E-mail: cah@who.int
Web site: http://www.who.int/child-adolescent-health
ISBN 92 4 154687 5
World Health
Organization
mergency
Triage
Assessment
and
Treatment
(ETAT)
Manual
for
participants
WH



Emergency Triage
Assessment
and
Treatment
(ETAT)
Manual for
participants
World Health
Organization



The WHO Department of Child and Adolescent Health and Development wishes to acknowledge the
help and support of Professor Elizabeth Molyneux, who developed the training course for the Emergency
Triage Assessment and Treatment on which these course materials are based. We would like to extend our
thanks to Patricia Whitesell, ACT, USA, who wrote a first draft of the materials, and to Dr. Jan Eshuis,
Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam, who developed the training materials further. In addition, we are
grateful to the participants and facilitators of several field tests of these materials for their comments. We
wish to thank Dr Carolyn Maclennan, Melbourne, Australia, Dr. Diana Silimperi and Lauri Winter,
Quality Assurance Project, Bethesda, USA for providing substantial comments and revisions during these
field tests, and the WHO Regional Offices for Africa, Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific for their
support.
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Emergency triage assessment and treatment (ETAT).
Contents: Manual for participants — Facilitator guide.
1. Triage. 2. Emergency treatment. 3. Child health services. 4. Teaching materials. I. World Health
Organization.
ISBN 92 4 154687 5 (participants) (NLM classification: WS 205)
ISBN 92 4 154688 3 (facilitator)
© World Health Organization 2005
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from WHO Press,
World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 2476; fax:
+41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO
publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press,
at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its
frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not
yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are
endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature
that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished
by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the information contained in this publication.
However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either express or
implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event
shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.
Printed in



Table of contents
Introduction 1
Learning objectives for the training course 2
Module One: Triage and the “ABCD” concept 3
The “ABCD” concept 4
Priority signs 4
The triaging process 4
When and where should triaging takes place? 5
Who should triage? 5
How to triage? 5
Assessing priority signs 6
General treatment for priority signs 8
The need for frequent reassessment 9
Assessment questions: Triage 10
Module Two: Airway and breathing 13
Assessment of the airway 13
Is the child breathing? Is the airway obstructed? 13
Management of the airway 14
Management of the choking child 14
Positioning to improve the airway 15
Is trauma of the neck a possibility? 16
Assessment breathing 17
Is the child breathing? 17
Does the child show central cyanosis? 17
Does the child have severe respiratory distress? 18
Management of breathing problems 18
Ventilate with bag and mask 18
Insertion of an oropharyngeal (Guedel) airway 19
Give oxygen 20
Assessment questions: Airway and breathing 23
Module Three: Circulation 25
Assess the circulation 26
Are the child’s hands warm? 26
Is the capillary refill longer than 3 seconds? 26
Is the pulse weak and fast? 27
Shock 27
Treatment of shock 27
Assessment questions: Circulation 32



Assess the child’s neurological status 35
Is the child in coma? 35
Is the child convulsing now? 36
Treatment of coma and convulsion 36
Manage the airway 37
Position the child 37
Check blood sugar 37
Give IV glucose 38
Give an anticonvulsant 39
Assessment questions: Coma and convulsion 41
Module Five: Dehydration 43
Assess for severe dehydration 43
Is the child lethargic 44
Does the child have sunken eyes? 44
Does a skin pinch go back very slowly (longer than 2 seconds)? 44
Treatment of severe dehydration in an emergency setting 45
Severe dehydration (without shock or severe malnutrition) 45
Give fluids by nasogastric tube if you cannot set up an intravenous infusion 45
Severe dehydration with severe malnutrition 47
Assessment questions: Dehydration 49
Module Six: Case management scenarios 53
Module Seven: Implementing ETAT 55
Objectives of the chapter/session 55
Implementing ETAT in your hospital 56
Advocacy 56
Patient flow and tasks 57
Material resources 57
Developing individual plans of actions 57
Annexes
Annex 1. Practical procedures 59
Giving parenteral fluids 59
Insertion of a nasogastric tube 63
Annex 2. Resources required to implement emergegncy care of children in hospitals 65
Annex 3. ETAT charts 67
Chart 2: Triage of all sick children 67
Chart 3: How to manage a choking child 69
Chart 4: How to manage the airway in a child with obstructed breathing
(or who has just stopped breathing) 70
Chart 5: How to give oxygen 71
Chart 6: How to position the unconscious child 72
Chart 7: How to give IV fluids rapidly for shock in a child without severe
malnutrition 73
Chart 8: How to give IV fluids for shock in a child with severe malnutrition 74
Chart 9: How to give diazepam (or paraldehyde) rectally 75
Chart 10: How to give IV glucose 76
Chart 11: How to treat severe dehydration in an emergency setting 77



Introduction
A nine-month old baby boy is carried into the children’s section of the outpatient
department in his mother’s arms. He appears to be asleep. At the triage desk he
is seen by a nurse and found to have lips and tongue that are grey/blue in colour,
and he is taken straight into the resuscitation room as an emergency.
In the resuscitation room he is given oxygen from an oxygen concentrator. He is
noted to be grunting and breathing very fast. His hands are cold to touch and
the capillary refill time is prolonged to four seconds. An intravenous cannula is
placed. A blood sample is taken at the same time for blood glucose, haematocrit
and other investigations. An intravenous infusion of normal saline is commenced
at 20ml/kg to run as fast as it can go.
Other treatments are given, depending on the result of the investigations and
the response to the treatment he receives. It is now 18 minutes since the baby
came through the outpatient department’s door, and his situation is stable. It is
now time to take a full history and carry out a full examination to make a
definitive diagnosis. He is diagnosed as having very severe pneumonia, and
receives specific treatment for this. However, before coming to this diagnosis,
no time was wasted, his status was stabilized, based on a few leading signs and
symptoms, even when the medical staff did not know exactly what was wrong
with him.
This was good triage and emergency management. Would it have happened like
this in your hospital? In this training course, you are going to acquire the necessary
knowledge and skills for the triage and emergency management of sick children,
and you will consider what is needed to introduce this to your hospital.
Deaths in hospital often occur within 24 hours of admission. Many of these
deaths could be prevented if very sick children are identified soon after their
arrival in the health facility, and treatment is started immediately. Therefore, a
process of rapid triage for all children presenting to hospital needs to be put in
place, to determine whether any emergency or priority signs are present. Triage
may be done in 15-20 seconds by medical staff or by non-medical staff (after
appropriate training) as soon as the child arrives, and no special equipment is
needed for this. Once emergency signs are identified, prompt emergency treatment
needs to be given to stabilize the condition of the child.



guidelines. These are adapted from the Advanced Paediatric Life Support
guidelines used in western countries, and they identify children with immediately
life-threatening conditions which are most frequently seen in developing
countries, such as obstruction of the airway and other breathing problems caused
by infections, shock, severely altered central nervous system function (coma or
convulsions), and severe dehydration.
These guidelines were developed in Malawi, and were field-tested in several
other countries including Angola, Brazil, Cambodia, Indonesia, Kenya and Niger.
The guidelines are contained in the manual “Management of the child with a
serious infection or severe malnutrition” and in the “Pocketbook of hospital
care for children”, on which this training course is based. This course manual is
primarily meant for the participants of a 3 1/2 days training course in Emergency
Triage, Assessment and Treatment. It provides participants with the reading
materials to prepare themselves for the modules taught in the course. Some of
the reading might be done during the course. In addition, it gives questions for
self-assessment which participants can respond to after having gone through the
training. Apart from use in a full-time training course, the reading will be useful
for trainers and participants who take part in training as a series of seminars.
Guidance on how to conduct such training is contained in a parallel facilitator’s
guide.
This training course does not stand on its own. It can be included in a quality
improvement process which targets the whole hospital or it can start such a
process. At the end of the course, participants plan for introducing an ETAT
process at their institution, by comparing the existing situation with international
standards, and suggesting actions to solve identified problems and to document
and evaluate such a process. Lessons learned in this process can be applied to
other areas of child health in hospital and to care of other patient groups.
Emergency management is by team, rather than by individual players, so team
work is emphasized and practised throughout the course.
Learning objectives for the training course
At the end of the course you will be able to:
(cid:132) Triage all sick children when they arrive at a health facility, into the
following categories:
- those with emergency signs
- those with priority signs
- those who are non-urgent cases.
(cid:132) Assess a child’s airway and breathing and give emergency treatments.
(cid:132) Assess the child’s status of circulation and level of consciousness.
(cid:132) Manage shock, coma, and convulsions in a child.
(cid:132) Assess and manage severe dehydration in a child with diarrhoea.
(cid:132) Plan and implement ETAT in your own working area in your hospital.



Triage and the "ABCD"
concept
Many deaths in hospital occur within 24 hours of admission. Some of these
TRIAGE
deaths can be prevented if very sick children are quickly identified on their
arrival and treatment is started without delay. In many hospitals around the is the sorting of patients
world, children are not checked before a senior health worker examines them; as into priority groups
a result, some seriously ill patients have to wait a very long time before they are
according to their need
seen and treated. Children are known to have died of a treatable condition
and the resources
when waiting in the queue for their turn. The idea of triage is to prevent this
available
from happening. The word “triage” means sorting. The use of triage to prioritize
the critically ill dates back to the early 19th century, when this was developed by
military surgeons in the Napoleonic war between France and Russia.
Triage is the process of rapidly examining all sick children when they first arrive
in hospital in order to place them in one of the following categories:
(cid:132) Those with EMERGENCY SIGNS who require immediate emergency
treatment.
If you find any emergency signs, do the following immediately:
- Start to give appropriate emergency treatment.
- Call a senior health worker and other health workers to help.
- Carry out emergency laboratory investigations.
(cid:132) Those with PRIORITY SIGNS, indicating that they should be given
E Emergency
priority in the queue, so that they can rapidly be assessed and treated
P Priority
without delay.
Q Queue (non-urgent)
(cid:132) Those who have no emergency or priority signs and therefore are NON-
URGENT cases. These children can wait their turn in the queue for
assessment and treatment.1 The majority of sick children will be non-
urgent and will not require emergency treatment.
After these steps are completed, proceed with general assessment and further
treatment according to the child’s priority.
In an ideal situation, all children should be checked on their arrival in hospital
by a person who is trained to assess how ill they are. This person decides whether
the patient will be seen immediately and will receive life-saving treatment, or
will be seen soon, or can safely wait his/her turn to be examined.
1 Sometimes it is discovered that a child in the queue is waiting for immunization. These children do not need
assessment and can be referred to the right department without delay.



Categories after triage Action required
EMERGENCY CASES Need immediate emergency treatment
PRIORITY CASES Need assessment and rapid attention
NON-URGENT CASES Can wait their turn in the queue
The ABCD concept
A Airway
B Breathing
Triage of patients involves looking for signs of serious illness or injury. These
C Circulation emergency signs relate to the Airway-Breathing-Circulation/Consciousness-
Coma Dehydration and are easily remembered as “ABCD”.
Convulsion Each letter refers to an emergency sign which, when positive, should alert you to
D Dehydration (severe) a patient who is seriously ill and needs immediate assessment and treatment.
Priority signs
Besides the group of emergency signs described above, there are priority signs,
which should alert you to a child who needs prompt, but not emergency
assessment. These signs can be remembered with the symbols 3 TPR - MOB:
(cid:132) Tiny baby: any sick child aged under two months
(cid:132) Temperature: child is very hot
(cid:132) Trauma or other urgent surgical condition
(cid:132) Pallor (severe)
(cid:132) Poisoning
(cid:132) Pain (severe)
(cid:132) Respiratory distress
(cid:132) Restless, continuously irritable, or lethargic
(cid:132) Referral (urgent)
(cid:132) Malnutrition: Visible severe wasting
(cid:132) Oedema of both feet
(cid:132) Burns
The frequency with which children showing some of these priority signs appear
in the outpatient department depends on the local epidemiology. The signs might
need to be adapted accordingly, for example by including signs for common
severe conditions which cannot wait in your setting.
The triaging process
Triaging should not take much time. For a child who does not have emergency
signs, it takes on average 20 seconds. The health worker should learn to assess
several signs at the same time. A child who is smiling or crying does not have
severe respiratory distress, shock or coma. The health worker looks at the child,
observes the chest for breathing and priority signs such as severe malnutrition
and listens to abnormal sounds such as stridor or grunting.


#### [Table Content]
| A B C D | Airway Breathing Circulation Coma Convulsion Dehydration (severe) |
| --- | --- |




A Airway
stamp being used in Malawi consisting of the “ABCD” signs in which the health
B Breathing
worker circles the correct step and initiates emergency treatment “E” or puts
C Circulation
them in priority groups “P” or “Q” for children who can wait in the queue.
Cm Coma
Colours can also be used for differentiating the three groups, giving a red sticker Cn Convulsion
to emergency cases, a yellow for priority and green for the queue. D Dehydration (severe)
E Emergency
WHEN AND WHERE SHOULD TRIAGING TAKE PLACE? P Priority
Q Queue
Triage should be carried out as soon as a sick child arrives in the hospital, well
before any administrative procedure such as registration. This may require
reorganizing the flow of patients in some locations.
Triage can be carried out in different locations – e.g. in the outpatient queue, in
the emergency room, or in a ward if the child has been brought directly to the
ward at night. In some settings, triage is done in all these places. Emergency
treatment can be given wherever there is room for a bed or trolley for the sick
child and enough space for the staff to work on the patient, and where appropriate
drugs and supplies are easily accessible. If a child with emergency signs is identified
in the outpatient queue, he/she must quickly be taken to a place where treatment
can be provided immediately, e.g. the emergency room or ward.
WHO SHOULD TRIAGE?
All clinical staff involved in the care of sick children should be prepared to carry
out rapid assessment in order to identify the few who are severely ill and require
emergency treatment. If possible, all such staff should be able to give initial
emergency treatment, as described in the flowchart and treatment charts. In
addition, people such as gatemen, record clerks, cleaners, janitors who have
early patient contact should be trained in triage for emergency signs and should
know where to send people for immediate management.
HOW TO TRIAGE?
Keep in mind the ABCD steps: Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Coma, Convulsion,
and Dehydration.
To assess if the child has airway or breathing problems you need to know:
(cid:132) Is the child breathing?
(cid:132) Is the airway obstructed?
(cid:132) Is the child blue (centrally cyanosed)?
Look, listen and feel for air movement. Obstructed breathing can be due to
blockage by the tongue, a foreign body, a swelling around the upper airway
(retropharyngeal abscess) or severe croup which may present with abnormal
sounds such as stridor.
(cid:132) Does the child have severe respiratory distress?
Is the child having trouble getting breath so that it is difficult to talk, eat or
breastfeed? Is he breathing very fast and getting tired, does he have severe chest
indrawing or is he using auxiliary respiratory muscles?



(cid:132) Does the child have warm hands?
(cid:132) If not, is the capillary refill time longer than 3 seconds?
(cid:132) And is the pulse weak and fast?
In the older child the radial pulse may be used; however, in the infant, the
brachial or femoral pulses may need to be felt.
To assess for coma you need to know:
A rapid assessment of conscious level can be made by assigning the patient to
one of the AVPU categories:
A Alert
V responds to Voice
P responds to Pain
U Unresponsive
A child who is not alert but responds to voice is lethargic. If the assessment
shows that the child does not respond to voice and only responds to pain (with
targeted or untargeted movements), or does not respond at all, the level is at “P”
or “U”. We then refer to that child as having coma and the child needs to be
If the child has any
treated accordingly.
sign of the ABCD, it
To assess for dehydration you need to know:
means the child has an
emergency “E” sign and (cid:132) If the child is lethargic or unconscious
emergency treatment (cid:132) If the child has sunken eyes
(cid:132) If the skin pinch goes back very slowly
should start
immediately When ABCD has been completed and there are no emergency signs, continue
to assess the priority signs.
Assessing priority signs
If the child does not have any of the E signs, the health worker proceeds to
assess the child on the priority signs. This should not take more than few seconds.
Some of these signs will have been noticed during the ABCD triage discussed so
far, and others need to be rechecked. Follow the 3 TPR-MOB to quickly complete
this section.
Tiny infant (less than two months of age)
If the child appears very young, ask the mother his age. If the child is obviously
not a young infant, you do not need to ask this question.
Small infants are more difficult to assess properly, more prone to getting infections
(from other patients), and more likely to deteriorate quickly if unwell. All tiny
babies of under two months should therefore be seen as a priority.
Temperature: Hot (fever - high Temperature)
A child that feels very hot may have high fever. Children with high fever on
touch need prompt treatment. Take the waiting child to the front of the queue
and take locally adopted action, like having the temperature checked by
thermometer, giving an antipyretic, or doing investigations like a blood film for
malaria.



Usually this is an obvious case, but one needs to think of acute abdomen, fractures
and head injuries in this category.
SeverePallor
Pallor is unusual paleness of the skin, and severe pallor is a
sign of severe anaemia which might need urgent transfusion.
It can be detected by comparing the child’s palms with
your own. If the palms are very pale (almost paper-white),
the child is severely anaemic.
Poisoning
A child with a history of swallowing drugs or other
dangerous substances needs to be assessed immediately, as
he can deteriorate rapidly and might need specific
Figure 1
treatments depending on the substance taken. The mother
Severe pallor
will tell you if she has brought the child because of possible
intoxication.
SeverePain
If a child has severe pain and is in agony, she/he should be prioritized to receive
early full assessment and pain relief. Severe pain may be due to severe conditions
such as acute abdomen, meningitis, etc.
Lethargy or Irritable and Restless
Recall from your assessment of coma with the AVPU scale whether the child
was lethargic. A lethargic child responds to voice but is drowsy and uninterested
(V in the AVPU scale).
The continuously irritable or restless child is conscious but cries constantly and
will not settle.
Respiratory distress
When you assessed the airway and breathing, did you observe any respiratory
distress? If the child has severe respiratory distress, it is an emergency. There
may be signs present that you do not think are severe, e.g. lower chest wall
indrawing (not severe), or difficulty in breathing. In this case, the child does not
require emergency treatment but will need urgent assessment. Decisions on the
severity of respiratory distress come with practice. If you have any doubts, have
the child seen and treated immediately.
UrgentReferral
The child may have been sent from another clinic. Ask the mother if she was
referred from another facility and for any note that may have been given to her.
Read the note carefully and determine if the child has an urgent problem.
Severe wasting (Severe Malnutrition)
A child with visible severe wasting has a form of malnutrition called marasmus. To
assess for this sign, look rapidly at the arms and legs as well as the child’s chest. A
detailed description is given in the section on dehydration (see pages 28/29).


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 1 Severe pallor |




Oedema of both feet is an important diagnostic feature of kwashiorkor, another
form of severe malnutrition. Other signs are changes in the skin and hair.
MajorBurn
Burns are extremely painful and children who seem quite well can deteriorate
rapidly. If the burn occurred recently, it is still worthwhile to cool the burnt area
with water, for example, by sitting the child in a bathtub with cool water. Any
child with a major burn, trauma or other surgical condition needs to be seen
quickly. Get surgical help or follow surgical guidelines.
Triage all sick children. When a child with emergency signs is identified, take to
the emergency room or treatment area and start the appropriate emergency
treatments immediately. Do not proceed to the next step before treatment is
begun for a positive sign.
Triage Steps Treat when any sign is positive
Treatment begins
when Assess A If positive, treat. If negative, proceed to B
Assess B If positive, treat. If negative, proceed to C
any emergency
Assess C If positive, treat. If negative, proceed to D
sign is identified
Assess D If positive, treat. If negative, proceed to priority signs
If the child has no emergency signs, check for priority signs. After the examination
for priority signs has been completed, the child will be assigned to one of:
Priority (P): the child should be put at the front of the queue
Queue (Q): if the child has no emergency or priority signs
Once appropriate emergency treatments have been initiated:
(cid:132) call for a senior health worker;
(cid:132) draw blood for emergency laboratory investigations such as blood
glucose, haemoglobin and malaria smear;
(cid:132) ask about head or neck trauma before providing treatment;
(cid:132) take careful note if the child is severely malnourished, because this will
affect the treatment of shock and dehydration caused by diarrhoea.
More than one
It is essential to act as quickly as possible and to start the emergency treatments.
treatment may have to
The team needs to stay calm and work together efficiently. The person in charge
be administered as of the emergency management of the child assigns tasks so that the assessment
quickly as possible, and can continue and treatments can be initiated as quickly as possible. Other health
workers help to give the treatment needed, especially since a very sick child may
several people may
need several treatments at once. The senior health worker will direct the treatment
have to work together
and immediately continue with a core assessment and follow-up of the child,
as a team
identifying all the child’s problems and developing the treatment plan.
GENERAL TREATMENT FOR PRIORITY SIGNS
Priority signs lead to quicker assessment of the child by moving the child to the
front of the queue. While waiting, some supportive treatments may already be
given. For example, a child found to have a hot body may receive an antipyretic



pain could be controlled while waiting for definitive treatment.
If a child has no emergency signs or priority signs, she/he may return to the
queue.
THE NEED FOR FREQUENT REASSESSMENT
During and following emergency treatment, the child should be re-assessed using
the complete ABCD process. The disease course is dynamic and there could be
new developments within a short time. Reassessment should begin with
assessment of the airway and through the ABCD.
Triage is the sorting of patients into priority groups according to their need.
All children should undergo triage. The main steps in triage are:
(cid:132) Look for emergency signs.
(cid:132) Treat any emergency signs you find.
(cid:132) Call a senior health worker to see any emergency.
(cid:132) Look for any priority signs.
(cid:132) Place priority patients at the front of the queue.
(cid:132) Move on to the next patient.
Triage should be carried out quickly. You will soon learn to observe several things
at once. For example, when assessing the airway and breathing you may note that
the baby is very small or is restless. With practice, a complete triage (if no emergency
treatment is needed) takes less than a minute.
SUMMARY


#### [Table Content]
| Triage is the sorting of patients into priority groups according to their need. All children should undergo triage. The main steps in triage are: (cid:132) Look for emergency signs. (cid:132) Treat any emergency signs you find. (cid:132) Call a senior health worker to see any emergency. (cid:132) Look for any priority signs. (cid:132) Place priority patients at the front of the queue. (cid:132) Move on to the next patient. Triage should be carried out quickly. You will soon learn to observe several things at once. For example, when assessing the airway and breathing you may note that the baby is very small or is restless. With practice, a complete triage (if no emergency treatment is needed) takes less than a minute. | SUMMARY |
| --- | --- |




Answer all the questions on this page, writing in the given spaces. If you have a
problem, ask for help from one of the facilitators.
GAIRT
:SNOITSEUQ
TNEMSSESSA
1. Define “triage”.
2. When and where should triage take place?
3. Who should do triaging?
4. What do the letters A, B, C and D in "ABCD" stand for?
5. List the priority signs:



6. Put the actions in the right chronological order: what will you do first, what next, what after that, and so on,
and what last?
Ask about head or neck trauma
Call a senior health worker to see any emergency
Have blood specimens taken for laboratory analysis
Look for any priority signs
Look for emergency signs
Move on to the next patient
Place priority patients at the front of the queue
Start treatment of any emergency signs you find
SSESSMENT
QUESTIONS:
TRIAGE
7. A three-year old girl is carried in her mother's arms wrapped in a blanket, in the queue. Her airway and
breathing are OK. She has cold hands. Her capillary refill is 1.5 seconds. She is alert. Asked if the child has
had diarrhoea, the mother answered "YES. Four loose stools per day". The skin pinch takes 3 seconds. How
do you triage this child?
8. A four-year old male child was rushed in. He convulsed one hour ago. He is
breathing fast but there is no cyanosis and no respiratory distress. He feels very hot, but responds quickly to
questions. He has no diarrhoea or vomiting. How do you triage this child?



GAIRT
:SNOITSEUQ
TNEMSSESSA
9. A one-year old had a seizure at home; then again outside the clinic. He became unconscious. His breathing
sounds very wet and noisy and there is drooling coming from his mouth. He is looking blue. How do you
triage this child?
10.A two-year old male is rushed to your clinic acutely convulsing. How do you triage this child?
11. What signs of malnutrition do you check during triage?
12. Where do you look for signs of severe wasting?
13. Below what age is a child always a priority?
14. What should you do if the child has a priority sign?



Airway and breathing
The letters A and B in “ABCD” represent “airway and breathing”. It is evident
A Airway
that an open (patent) airway is needed for breathing. An airway or breathing
B Breathing
problem is life-threatening and must receive your attention before you move on
C Circulation
to other systems. It is therefore convenient that the first two letters of the alphabet
represent the two most important areas to look for emergency or priority signs. Coma
If there is no problem with the airway or breathing, you should look for signs in Convulsion
the areas represented by C.
D Dehydration (severe)
This section examines the assessment of the signs concerning the child’s airway
and breathing that suggest a need for emergency treatments, and what treatments
to give.
To assess if the child has an airway or breathing problem you need to know:
(cid:132) Is the child breathing?
(cid:132) Is the airway obstructed?
(cid:132) Is the child blue (centrally cyanosed)?
(cid:132) Does the child have severe respiratory distress?
If the child is not breathing or if the airway appears obstructed, you must first
open the airway.
Table 1
Assessment and treatment of airway and breathing
A B (cid:132) Not breathing
(cid:190) Manage airway
(cid:132) Central cyanosis, or Any sign positive (cid:190) Give oxygen
AIRWAY AND (cid:132) Severe respiratory distress
(cid:190) Make sure the child is warm
BREATHING If yes, is the breathing obstructed?
Check for head/neck trauma before treating the child; do not move neck if cervical spine injury is possible.
Assessment of the airway
IS THE CHILD BREATHING? IS THE AIRWAY OBSTRUCTED?
If the child is not breathing, or if the child has severe respiratory distress, is
there an obstruction to the flow of air? Obstruction can occur at several levels.


#### [Table Content]
| A B | Airway Breathing |
| --- | --- |
| C D | Circulation Coma Convulsion Dehydration (severe) |

| Table 1 Assessment and treatment of airway and breathing |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A B AIRWAY AND BREATHING | (cid:132) Not breathing (cid:132) Central cyanosis, or (cid:132) Severe respiratory distress If yes, is the breathing obstructed? | Any sign positive | (cid:190) Manage airway (cid:190) Give oxygen (cid:190) Make sure the child is warm |
| Check for head/neck trauma before treating the child; do not move neck if cervical spine injury is possible. |  |  |  |




piece of fruit) can lodge in the upper airway. Croup can also cause upper airway
obstruction. Coins and peanuts are notorious causes of aspiration and subsequent
choking. Ask the child’s caretaker explicitly for a history of choking. Techniques
to remove foreign bodies are based on support of forced expiration rather than
a blind finger sweep of the mouth or other mechanical. A blind finger sweep in
infants and children should not be done, as it might cause serious bleeding.
Attempts to force the foreign body out of the airway should be done immediately,
because airflow may be halted completely and sudden death could be imminent.
Management of the airway
MANAGEMENT OF THE CHOKING CHILD
A child with a history of aspiration of a foreign body who shows increasing
If the child is choking, respiratory distress is in immediate danger of choking. Attempts to remove the
do not hesitate, call for foreign body should be made instantly. Do not hesitate. Apply back slaps or
help and immediately Heimlich manoeuvre. The treatment differs depending on whether there is a
foreign body causing respiratory obstruction or some other cause for the
manage the airway
obstruction or respiratory distress.
according to the
If a foreign body is causing the obstruction, the treatment depends on the age of
instructions
the child.
Management of young infant (see Figure 2)
(cid:132) Lay the infant on your arm or thigh in a head down position
(cid:132) Give 5 blows to the infant’s back with heel of hand
(cid:132) If obstruction persists, turn infant over and give 5 chest thrusts with 2
fingers, one finger breadth below nipple level in midline
(cid:132) If obstruction persists, check infant’s mouth for any obstruction which
can be removed
(cid:132) If necessary, repeat sequence with back slaps again
Back slaps Chest thrusts
Figure 2
Management of young infant


#### [Table Content]
| Back slaps Chest thrusts |
| --- |
| Figure 2 Management of young infant |




(cid:132) Give 5 blows to the child’s back with heel of hand with child sitting,
kneeling or lying
(cid:132) If the obstruction persists, go behind the child and pass your arms
around the child’s body; form a fist with one hand immediately below
the child’s sternum; place the other hand over the fist and pull upwards
into the abdomen; repeat this Heimlich manoeuvre 5 times
(cid:132) If the obstruction persists, check the child’s mouth for any obstruction
which can be removed
(cid:132) If necessary, repeat this sequence with backslaps again
Slapping the back to clear Heimlich
airway obstruction in a manoeuvre in a
choking child choking older
child
Figure 3
Management of child
After you have performed this procedure you should check inside the mouth for
any foreign body. Obvious foreign bodies should be removed. Secretions should
be cleared from the throat of all children. The breathing should be checked
again.
POSITIONING TO IMPROVE THE AIRWAY
An airway or breathing problem is life-threatening. This
child needs immediate treatment to improve or restore the
breathing, even before you continue with the assessment
of emergency signs. To treat an airway or breathing problem
you should first open the airway and then begin giving the
child oxygen. The drawings below show the chin lift. This
is a way of opening the airway in children who have not
been subjected to trauma. The drawings illustrate two
different positions. Figure 4 shows the position for infants,
Figure 4
the nose pointing upwards. Figure 5 shows the position
Neutral position to open airway in an infant
for children, the chin pointing up. In both cases, place
(“nose up”)
your hand on the child’s forehead and apply a little pressure


#### [Table Content]
| Slapping the back to clear Heimlich airway obstruction in a manoeuvre in a choking child choking older child |
| --- |
| Figure 3 Management of child |

|  |
| --- |
|  |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 4 Neutral position to open airway in an infant (“nose up”) |




to gently lift the chin.
To do this safely you must know if the child has been
subjected to any trauma. In such a case, it is important
not to tilt the head or move the neck. It is also important
to know the child’s age because you will position an infant
(under 12 months of age) differently from a child.
IS TRAUMA OF THE NECK A POSSIBILITY?
Any child with an emergency sign needs emergency
treatment. However, always ask and check for head or neck
trauma before treating, as this will determine how much a
Figure 5
child can be moved. If a child has trauma you must avoid
Sniffing position to open up airway in an older
further injury during assessment or treatment. To check
child (“chin up”)
for head or neck trauma:
(cid:132) Ask if the child has had trauma to the head or
neck, or a fall which could have damaged the
spine
(cid:132) Look for bruises or other signs of head or neck
trauma
(cid:132) Stabilize the neck if trauma is suspected
If you suspect trauma which might have affected the neck
or spine, do not move the head or neck as you treat the
child and continue the assessment. This child may have a
Figure 6
spinal injury, which could be made worse by moving him.
Jaw thrust without head tilt
To open and manage the airway when trauma is suspected
ajaw thrust is used, as is illustrated in Figure 6. This is a
way of opening the airway without moving the head. It is
safe to use in cases of trauma for children of all ages. The
jaw thrust is achieved by placing two or three fingers under
the angle of the jaw on both sides, and lifting the jaw
upwards.
If neck trauma is suspected, stabilize the neck (Figure 7):
(cid:132) Stabilize the child’s neck and keep the child lying
on the back
(cid:132) Tape the child’s forehead to the sides of a firm
board to secure this position
(cid:132) Prevent the neck from moving by supporting the
Figure 7 child’s head (e.g. using litre bags of IV fluid on
Stabilising the neck when trauma is suspected each side)
(cid:132) Place a strap over the chin
If vomiting, turn on the side, keeping the head in line with
the body (see Figure 8 {log roll}). If the child is restless, ask an attendant to
stabilize the neck without upsetting the child more.
Log roll
Move a patient with a suspected cervical spine injury carefully. Avoid rotation
and extremes of flexion and extension. One person, usually the most senior


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 6 Jaw thrust without head tilt |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 7 Stabilising the neck when trauma is suspected |




top end of the patient, hold the patient’s head, and place the fingers under the
angle of the mandible with the palm over the ears and parietal region and maintain
gentle traction to keep the neck straight and in line with the body. When the
patient is not being moved, a sandbag1 placed on each side or a cervical collar
can splint the neck.
Infant
Before moving to the
next section you will be
Child
given the opportunity to
practise the skills
needed for moving a
patient with an injury of
Figure 8
the neck
Log roll: stabilizing the neck of the patient while moving the body
Assessment of breathing
IS THE CHILD BREATHING?
To assess whether or not the child is breathing there are
three things you must do (see Figure 9):
(cid:132) LOOK
If active, talking, or crying, the child is obviously
breathing. If none of these, look again to see
whether the chest is moving.
(cid:132) LISTEN
Listen for any breath sounds. Are they normal?
(cid:132) FEEL
Can you feel the breath at the nose or mouth of
the child?
If the child is not breathing, you need to support the Figure 9
breathing artificially by ventilating the child with a bag Look, listen and feel for breathing
and mask.
DOES THE CHILD SHOW CENTRAL CYANOSIS?
Cyanosis occurs when there is an abnormally low level of oxygen in the blood.
This produces a bluish or purplish discoloration of the tongue, the inside of the
mouth and the skin. This sign may be absent in a child who has severe anaemia.
To assess for central cyanosis, look at the mouth and tongue. A bluish or purplish
discoloration of the tongue and the inside of the mouth indicates central cyanosis.
1


#### [Table Content]
| Infant Child |
| --- |
| Figure 8 Log roll: stabilizing the neck of the patient while moving the body |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 9 Look, listen and feel for breathing |




If the child has severe respiratory distress there is increased work during breathing.
The child may appear tired and distressed from the effort of trying to get enough
oxygen into the lungs, and the breathing appears fast.
If the child is talking, drinking or feeding comfortably, or appears to be happy,
Signs of severe there is no severe respiratory distress (or obstructed breathing).
respiratory distress
Observe whether the child has significant discomfort from not getting enough
- Very fast breathing air into the lungs. Is there difficulty in breathing while talking, eating or
- Severe lower chest wall breastfeeding? Is the child breathing very fast, have severe lower chest wall
indrawing indrawing, or using the auxiliary muscles for breathing which cause the head to
- Use of auxiliary muscles nod or bob with every inspiration? The latter is particularly seen in young infants.
- Head nodding If you see this, the child has severe respiratory distress.
- Inability to feed because
Is the child’s breathing very laboured – i.e. needing much more effort to breathe
of respiratory problems
than normal? Is the child exhausted (tired)? Are any of the signs of severe
respiratory distress present?
Abnormal respiratory noises
Are there any noises heard when breathing in? A harsh noise on breathing in is
called stridor, a short noise when breathing out in young infants is called
grunting. Both noises are signs of severe respiratory problems.
If the child is breathing adequately, go to the next section to quickly continue
the assessment for emergency signs. If the child has an airway or breathing
problem, you should initiate appropriate treatment and then quickly resume
the assessment.
Management of breathing problems
VENTILATE WITH BAG AND MASK
If the child is not breathing after management of the airway, ventilate with a
self-inflating bag and mask. Such a bag fills itself with room air when released,
and when squeezed again, pushes air through an outlet, to which a mask is
attached for inflating the lungs. The bag is used together with a facemask. It is
important to use the right size of facemask to prevent leakage. Before use, check
the bag and valve by closing the patient’s connection with
your thumb and attempt to expel air from the bag. If the
bag and valve are in order, this will not be possible until
you release your thumb. If either the bag or valve is faulty,
the bag will empty easily. If you have oxygen, this should
be connected to the mask (see Figure 10).
It is important for the mask to be the correct size for the
child and that it is placed correctly over the face. The correct
size and position are shown in the illustration. There are
several sizes of mask, and a selection of these should be
available (see Figure 11).
Figure 10
Ventilating a baby with a self-inflating mask


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 10 Ventilating a baby with a self-inflating mask |




1 2 3 4
1. Correct size and position
2. Mask too large, overlaps the
chin
3. Mask too small, nostrils not
covered
4. Mask too large, overlap with
eyes
Figure 11
Choosing the right mask size
INSERTION OF AN OROPHARYNGEAL (GUEDEL) AIRWAY
The oropharyngeal or Guedel airway can be used in an unconscious
patient to improve airway opening. It may not be tolerated in a patient
who is awake and may induce choking or vomiting. Guedel airways
come in different sizes. An appropriate sized airway goes from the
centre of the teeth (incisors) to the angle of the jaw when laid on the
face with the raised curved side (concave) up (“the right side up”).
Infant
Figure 12
Guedel tubes of different sizes
(cid:132) Select an appropriate sized airway
and types
(cid:132) Position the child to open the airway (p.15), taking care not to
move the neck if trauma suspected
(cid:132) Using a tongue depressor, insert the oropharyngeal airway the
convex side up
(cid:132) Re-check airway opening
(cid:132) Use a different sized airway or reposition if necessary
(cid:132) Give oxygen
Child
(cid:132) Select an appropriate sized oropharyngeal airway
(cid:132) Open the child’s airway, taking care not to move the neck if Figure 13
trauma suspected Selecting the right size of an
(cid:132) Using a tongue depressor, insert the airway “upside down” oropharyngeal airway
(concave side up) until the tip reaches the soft palate
(cid:132) Rotate through 180° and slide back over the tongue
(cid:132) Re-check airway opening
(cid:132) Use a different sized airway or reposition if necessary
(cid:132) Give oxygen
Figure 14
Inserting an oropharyngeal airway
in an infant: convex side up


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 12 Guedel tubes of different sizes and types |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 13 Selecting the right size of an oropharyngeal airway |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 14 Inserting an oropharyngeal airway in an infant: convex side up |




concave side up turning it around
Figure 15
Inserting an oropharyngeal airway in an older child
GIVE OXYGEN
For all children who have any problem with their airway
or breathing, always give oxygen first, while you continue
to assess for other problems. Central cyanosis is a sign of
deficient oxygenation (desaturation) and these children
need oxygen urgently; however, children who are anaemic
and desaturated may not show cyanosis, but also need
oxygen. Many children with severe respiratory distress and
with shock are also desaturated or not delivering enough
oxygen to the brain and other vital organs and will benefit
from oxygen treatment.
Sources of oxygen to treat hypoxaemia
There are two possible sources of oxygen: oxygen
concentrators (see Figure 16) and oxygen-filled cylinders
Figure 16
(see Figure 17):
Oxygen concentrator
(cid:132) Oxygen concentrators work by pumping room
air through a zeolite canister to remove nitrogen,
thus concentrating the oxygen. The device is of
moderate cost, requires little maintenance, and,
once purchased, produces oxygen continuously at
low cost. A continuous electrical supply is
required, however, to operate the pump.
(cid:132) Oxygen cylinders are easy to use, requiring only
a flow meter and appropriate tubing, and can
operate even when there is no electrical supply.
The oxygen in cylinders is, however, relatively
expensive and maintaining a constant supply is
often difficult, especially at peripheral hospitals
and health centres.
Depending on the availability or possibility of introduction
at your health facility, you will be demonstrated one or
Figure 17
both during the course.
Oxygen cylinder


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 16 Oxygen concentrator |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 17 Oxygen cylinder |




Two methods are recommended for the delivery of oxygen in an emergency
setting: nasal prongs and nasal catheter. Nasal prongs are best for delivering
oxygen to young infants and children with severe croup or pertussis; do not use
a nasal catheter as they provoke paroxysms of coughing.
An alternative method in emergency settings is the use of A Infant size prongs
a face mask, which requires higher flow rates. It is therefore B Adult size prongs
Note: the distance between the outlet tubes is
not suitable for permanent oxygen delivery on the ward,
larger and the tubes are thicker
as it wastes a precious resource. It is important to have the
C Joined prongs for adults with a connector
proper equipment to control oxygen flow rates (0.5-2 litres/ between 2 separate pieces of tubing
minute).
(cid:132) Nasal prongs (see Figure 18) are short tubes
inserted into the nostrils. Place them just inside
the nostrils and secure with a piece of tape on the
cheeks near the nose (see Figure 19). Care should
be taken to keep the nostrils clear of mucus, which
could block the flow of oxygen. Set a flow rate of
0.5-1 litres/min in infants and 1-2 litres/min if
older in order to deliver 30-35% oxygen
concentration in the inspired air.
Prongs come in different sizes for adults and
children. If you have only adult-size prongs, and
the outlet tubes are too far apart to fit into the
child's nostrils, cut the outlet tubes off and direct
the jet of the oxygen into the nostrils.
(cid:132) A nasal catheter is made from tubing of 6 or 8
A B C
FG size such as a nasogastric tube or suction
catheter. The tubing is inserted into either nostril
Figure 18
a distance equivalent to that from the child’s
Nasal prongs with tubing
nostril to the inner eyebrow (see Figure 20). It
must then be firmly secured using tape, and
connected to the oxygen. The tip of the catheter
should NOT be visible below the uvula. Set a flow rate of 0.5-1 litres
for infants and 1-2 litres/min for older children, which delivers an
oxygen concentration of 45-60% in the inspired air.
Figure 19 Figure 20
Nasal prongs correctly positioned Correct position of nasal catheter
and secured (cross-sectional view)


#### [Table Content]
| A Infant size prongs B Adult size prongs Note: the distance between the outlet tubes is larger and the tubes are thicker C Joined prongs for adults with a connector between 2 separate pieces of tubing A B C |
| --- |
| Figure 18 Nasal prongs with tubing |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 19 Nasal prongs correctly positioned and secured |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 20 Correct position of nasal catheter (cross-sectional view) |




At this point it is important for you to be familiar with the
equipment in your own department. You should be able to put
together and take apart a self-inflating bag. You should be able
to work the oxygen cylinder or oxygen concentrator. You can
find out which size masks you have and try them on real
patients to get an idea which size suits which age group. You
can also practise the chin lift.
To assess the airway and breathing you need to know:
(cid:132) Is the airway obstructed?
(cid:132) Is the child breathing?
(cid:132) Is the child cyanosed?
(cid:132) Are there signs of severe respiratory distress?
If the patient is not breathing you need to:
(cid:132) Open the airway
(cid:132) Remove any foreign body
(cid:132) Ventilate with a bag and mask.
In all cases of airway or breathing problems:
(cid:132) Give oxygen: 0.5 1 litre/min (<1-year-olds) and 1 2 litres/minute
(older children).
YRAMMUS
A
B
Figure 21
Yankhauer (A) catheter and Suction (B)
catheter for clearing secretions from the
airway


#### [Table Content]
| YRAMMUS | To assess the airway and breathing you need to know: (cid:132) Is the airway obstructed? (cid:132) Is the child breathing? (cid:132) Is the child cyanosed? (cid:132) Are there signs of severe respiratory distress? If the patient is not breathing you need to: (cid:132) Open the airway (cid:132) Remove any foreign body (cid:132) Ventilate with a bag and mask. In all cases of airway or breathing problems: (cid:132) Give oxygen: 0.5 1 litre/min (<1-year-olds) and 1 2 litres/minute (older children). |
| --- | --- |




SSESSMENT
QUESTIONS:
AIRWAY
AND
BREATHING
Answer all the questions on this page, writing in the given spaces. If you have a
problem, ask for help from one of the facilitators.
1. List the three things you do to check airway and breathing:
2. List three signs of severe respiratory distress:
3. Does stridor occur in inspiration or expiration?
4. When opening the airway of an infant (<12 months) who has not been subjected to trauma, name the
part of the body that should point upwards.
5. What size of tubing should you use for a nasal catheter?



NIHTAERB
DNA
YAWRIA
:SNOITSEUQ
TNEMSSESSA
6. At what flow (volume/time) should oxygen be started?
7. You have successfully removed a coin from the trachea (windpipe) of a three-year old boy by applying
Heimlich's manoeuvre. You checked his respiration and found that he was breathing normally. What do
you do next?
8. A 4-year old boy hit by a bicycle was carried in on a blanket. The child was unconscious responding only
to pain. His breathing was noisy. What do you do?
9. A nine-month girl and her older brother have been playing in the emergency department with an old
bead necklace, suddenly the child is brought to you by one of the nurses, the child is choking. What do
you do?
10.A three-year old boy is carried into the outpatient department in his father's arms. He is pale, floppy and
having difficulty breathing. His father says he has been unwell and coughing for 3 days. Weight 14kg.
He breathes fast with heavy severe chest indrawing. The airway is patent. He is alert. How do you triage
this child? What do you do?



Circulation
The letter C in “ABCD” stands for
A Airway
(cid:132) circulation (assessment and management of shock); B Breathing
(cid:132) assessment and management of coma; and
C Circulation
(cid:132) convulsions.
Coma
With experience you can assess these emergency signs very quickly, almost
Convulsion
simultaneously. You can recognize some immediately, such as coma
D Dehydration (severe)
(unconsciousness) and convulsions.
These assessments are done if the assessment of airway and breathing was normal,
or after emergency treatments have been given for any respiratory problems
encountered.
In the table below, the signs are listed on the left and the corresponding treatments
on the right. Complete the assessment of all the signs on the left before deciding
on and initiating treatment. However, because the assessment is done quickly
(in less than a minute) there is hardly any delay in beginning the necessary
treatment. You always need to check whether the child may have head or neck
trauma, because this will affect how you treat the child.
Table 2
Assessment and treatment of circulation
C Cold hand with: (cid:190) Stop any bleeding
1 (cid:132) Capillary refill longer than 3 (cid:190) Give oxygen
Any sign positive
CIRCULATION seconds, and (cid:190) Make sure the child is warm
(cid:132) Weak and fast pulse IF NO SEVERE MALNUTRITION:
(cid:132) Insert IV and begin giving fluids
Check for severe malnutrition rapidly.
If not able to insert peripheral IV,
insert an external jugular or intra-
osseous line.
IF SEVERE MALNUTRITION:
(cid:132) Give IV glucose
(cid:132) Proceed immediately to full
assessment and treatment
Check for head/neck trauma before treating the child; do not move neck if cervical spine injury is possible.


#### [Table Content]
| A B | Airway Breathing |
| --- | --- |
| C | Circulation |
| D | Coma Convulsion Dehydration (severe) |

| Table 2 Assessment and treatment of circulation |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| C 1 CIRCULATION | Cold hand with: (cid:132) Capillary refill longer than 3 seconds, and (cid:132) Weak and fast pulse | Any sign positive Check for severe malnutrition | (cid:190) Stop any bleeding (cid:190) Give oxygen (cid:190) Make sure the child is warm IF NO SEVERE MALNUTRITION: (cid:132) Insert IV and begin giving fluids rapidly. If not able to insert peripheral IV, insert an external jugular or intra- osseous line. IF SEVERE MALNUTRITION: (cid:132) Give IV glucose (cid:132) Proceed immediately to full assessment and treatment |
| Check for head/neck trauma before treating the child; do not move neck if cervical spine injury is possible. |  |  |  |




First in this section we will look at the assessment of circulation and signs of
shock.
To assess if a child has a circulation problem you need to know:
(cid:132) Does the child have warm hands?
(cid:132) If not, is the capillary refill time longer than 3 seconds?
(cid:132) And is the pulse weak and fast?
ARE THE CHILD’S HANDS WARM?
If the child’s hands are warm, there is no problem with the circulation and you
can move to the next assessment. If they are cold, you need to assess the
circulation further. If the circulation is poor, as during shock, the blood flow
moves to the most important parts of the body. So the hands, feet and skin get
less blood and often feel cold.
To assess the circulation, take the child’s hand in your own. If it feels warm, the
child has no circulation problem and you do not need to assess capillary refill or
pulse. If the child’s hands feel cold, you need to assess the capillary refill.
IS THE CAPILLARY REFILL TIME LONGER THAN 3 SECONDS?
Capillary refill (see Figure 22) is a simple test that assesses how quickly blood
returns to the skin after pressure is applied. It is carried out by applying pressure
to the pink part of the nail bed of the thumb or big toe. The capillary refill time
is the time from release of pressure to complete return of the pink
colour. It should be less than 3 seconds. If it is more than 3 seconds
the child is shocked. Capillary refill is prolonged in shock because
A the body tries to maintain blood flow to vital organs and reduces
the blood supply to less important parts of the body like the skin
(peripheral vasoconstriction). The vessels open slowly because of
low pulse pressure. This sign is reliable except when the room
temperature is low; a cold environment may also cause
vasoconstriction and thus cause a delayed capillary refill. So you
will need to check the pulse only if the room is cold.1
B
To assess capillary refill, grasp the child’s thumb or big toe between
finger and thumb. Look at the pink of the nail bed. Apply minimal
pressure necessary for 3 seconds to produce blanching of the nail
bed. The pressure should be sufficient to cause blanching (a change
in colour from pink to white). The pressure is applied for 3 seconds
and then released. Time the capillary refill from the moment of
release until total return of the pink colour. If the refill time is longer
A. Applying pressure to the nail bed for 3
than 3 seconds, the child may have a circulation problem with shock.
seconds
To confirm, it is necessary to check the pulses.
B. Check the time to the return of the pink
colour after releasing the pressure
Figure 22
Checking capillary refill
1 In hot climates it may not be necessary to check the pulse. Low environmental temperatures do not exist and thus


#### [Table Content]
| A B A. Applying pressure to the nail bed for 3 seconds B. Check the time to the return of the pink colour after releasing the pressure |
| --- |
| Figure 22 Checking capillary refill |




The radial pulse (the pulse at the wrist) should be felt. If this is strong and not
obviously fast, the pulse is adequate; no further assessment is needed.
If the radial pulse is difficult to find, you need to look for a more central pulse
(a pulse nearer to the heart). In an infant (less than one year of age) the best
place to look is at the middle of the upper arm, the brachial
pulse. If the child is lying down you could look for the
femoral pulse in the groin. In an older child you should
feel for the carotid pulse in the neck. The pulse should be
strong. If the more central pulse feels weak, decide if it
also seems fast. This is a subjective judgement and an exact
count is not taken. If the central pulse is weak and fast,
the child needs treatment for shock.
All these procedures can and should be practised on
yourself, your friends, your children and family, and finally
on real patients. This is the best way to improve in testing
Figure 23
capillary refill and finding pulses.
Feeling the brachial pulse in an infant
Note that we do not recommend blood pressure to assess
for shock because of two reasons: 1) Low blood pressure is
a late sign in children and may not help identify treatable cases and 2) the BP
cuff necessary in children of different age groups is mostly unavailable in many
district hospitals.
To assess the
Shock
circulation, you need to
The most common cause of shock in children is due to loss of fluid from know:
circulation, either through loss from the body as in severe diarrhoea or when the 1. Does the child have
child is bleeding, or through capillary leak in a disease such as severe Dengue warm hands?
fever. In all cases, it is important to replace this fluid quickly. An intravenous
2. If not, is the capillary
line must be inserted and fluids given rapidly in shocked children without severe
refill more than 3 seconds?
malnutrition. The recommended volumes of fluids to treat shock depending on
3. And is the pulse weak
the age/weight of child are shown in Chart 7 (see Annex 3).
and fast?
If the child has severe malnutrition, you must use a different fluid and a different
rate of administration and monitor the child very closely. Therefore a different In other words, is the
regime is used for these children. Treatment of shock in the malnourished child
child shocked?
is shown in Chart 8 (see Annex 3).
TREATMENT OF SHOCK
If the child has cold hands, a capillary refill time more than 3 seconds, and
a fast weak pulse, then he or she is in shock.
Treatment of shock requires teamwork. The following actions need to be started
simultaneously:
(cid:132) If the child has any bleeding, apply pressure to stop the bleeding
(cid:132) Give oxygen
(cid:132) Make sure the child is warm


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 23 Feeling the brachial pulse in an infant |




(cid:132)
(cid:132) Establish IV or intraosseous access
(cid:132) Take blood samples for emergency laboratory tests
(cid:132) Begin giving fluids for shock.
Stop any bleeding
The best and safest way to stop bleeding is to apply firm and direct
pressure to the point that is bleeding. Do not use a tourniquet.
Give oxygen
All children who are in shock require oxygen. It can be given in any
of the ways discussed in the previous section.
Make sure the child is warm
This should be done by ensuring that the child is dry and covered
with blankets or warm clothing.
Select an appropriate site for administration of fluids
The most appropriate route for administration is intravenous and a
peripheral vein is preferable but not always accessible. Alternatives
are intraosseous infusion or a central vein catheter. Read Annex 1:
Practical procedures for establishing IV access.
Figure 24 Give intravenous fluid
Controlling external bleeding
Firstly consider if the child also has severe malnutrition before
selecting treatment as shown on Table 3.
Children with severe malnutrition are difficult to assess and manage. The
malnourished child may appear lethargic and have sunken eyes and a very slow
skin pinch as he/she has no subcutaneous fat. Malnutrition not only affects the
Before giving the IV
muscles but also the organs we cannot see. The heart can become very weak and
fluid check for severe
may fail if it has to pump large volumes of fluid. When this happens fluid
malnutrition accumulates in the lungs (lung oedema) and makes breathing difficult with the
child geting worse or even critical.
Therefore, a child who is severely malnourished should not be treated by rapid
IV infusion of fluids. The signs of dehydration overestimate the degree of
dehydration in the severely malnourished child. It is important to involve a
senior heath worker early in the management of these children.
To check for severe malnutrition:
(cid:132) Look for visible severe wasting
A child with visible severe wasting has a form of malnutrition called
marasmus. To assess for this sign, look rapidly at the arms and legs and
pull up the shirt to look at the chest (see Figure 25). The marasmic child
does not look just thin, but appears to be all skin and bone. The skin
looks too large for the body, there is no fat on the child and you will see
the outlines of the ribs. There is also severe muscle wasting of the arms,
legs and buttocks. The head may appear relatively large because of wasting
of the body.


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 24 Controlling external bleeding |




(cid:132)
Oedema is a major sign of kwashiorkor, a severe form of long-
standing malnutrition. To assess for oedema you first need to
look at the feet after removing the booties or shoes. Press the
top of the foot gently with your thumb for a few seconds.
Oedema is present if a definite dent is left in the tissues. Look
and feel to determine if the child has oedema of both feet.
Use your thumb to press gently for a few seconds on the
topside of each foot (see Figure 26). The child has oedema if
there is an impression when you lift your thumb. Check if the
other foot also has oedema. Localized oedema can be due to
injury or infection.
The recommended fluids and rates of administration are shown in
Charts 7 and 8 (see Annex 3) and summarized in the tables on the
next two pages. However, if the child has severe malnutrition, you
must use a different fluid and a different rate of administration and
monitor the child very closely. Children with severe malnutrition
are very delicate and can easily go into congestive heart failure from
intravenous fluids. Sometimes children with severe malnutrition have
Figure 25
circulatory signs suggesting shock, but have sepsis rather than
Visible severe wasting (marasmus)
hypovolemia. It is important to involve a clinician who understands
the guidelines for caring for a child with severe malnutrition; the
clinician should immediately carry out a full assessment to
understand the clinical situation of the child. If at all possible, avoid
IV – use a nasogastric (NG) tube or oral fluids. If the child cannot
swallow or tolerate an NG tube (e.g. vomiting), use ½-strength
normal saline with 5% glucose at 15 ml/kg in 1 hr, but monitor
carefully and remove as soon as it is safe to do so. Stay with the
child and check the pulse and breathing rate every 5 minutes.
Discontinue the intravenous infusion if either of these increase (pulse
by 15, respiratory rate by 5/min).
Before giving the IV fluids, check for severe malnutrition. Note the
differences in fluid type and volume between the well-nourished
and the severely malnourished.
Charts 7 and 8 give approximate volumes by age groups. This is a
useful guideline in the emergency situation, when you may not have
a chance to weigh the child. It may be helpful to put this chart on
the wall in your department. After applying pressure for a few seconds, a
pit remains after the finger is removed
If you reassess the circulation and find a definite improvement at
any stage, the pulse has slowed or the capillary refill has improved,
Figure 26
you can prescribe maintenance fluids and move onto the next stage
Pitting oedema on dorsum foot
of triage.


#### [Table Content]
| After applying pressure for a few seconds, a pit remains after the finger is removed |
| --- |
| Figure 26 Pitting oedema on dorsum foot |




Table 3
Treatment of shock
If the child has NO severe malnutrition If the child HAS severe malnutrition
See Chart 7 See Chart 8
Insert an intravenous line (and draw blood for Avoid IV, find out if the child can drink or use a
(cid:132) (cid:132)
emergency laboratory investigations). nasogastric tube (NGT).
Fix the cannula and immobilize the extremity Weigh the child.
(cid:132) (cid:132)
with a splint. Insert an intravenous line (and draw blood for
(cid:132)
Attach Ringer’s lactate or normal saline - emergency laboratory investigations).
(cid:132)
make sure the infusion is running well. Fix the cannula and immobilize the extremity with
(cid:132)
Infuse 20 ml/kg as rapidly as possible. a splint.
(cid:132)
The circulation should be reassessed as Give ReSoMal rehydration fluid orally or by NGT:
(cid:132) (cid:132)
described before. - 5 ml/kg every 30 min for 2 hours, then
- 5-10 ml/kg/hour for 4-10 hours, or
Improvement: warmer hands, pulse slows and - give half-strength normal saline (or half strength
capillary refill faster. Darrows with 5% glucose) with 5% glucose at
15 ml/kg give over 1 hour
Stay with the child and check the pulse and
If there is NO improvement: (cid:132)
breathing rate every 5-10 minutes.
Give another 20 ml/kg of Ringer’s lactate or
(cid:132)
Discontinue the intravenous infusion if either of
normal saline as quickly as possible. (cid:132)
these increase (pulse by 15, respiratory rate by 5/
Reassess the circulation again, and if there is
min).
still no improvement.
Give another 20 ml/kg of Ringer’s lactate or
(cid:132)
normal saline, as quickly as possible. The If there IS improvement:
circulation should be assessed again. pulse and breathing rate fall.
Repeat 15ml/kg over 1 hour.
(cid:132)
If there is still NO improvement: (cid:132) Switch to oral or NGT rehydration with ReSoMal
10ml/kg/hour.
Give 20 ml/kg of blood over 30 minutes
(cid:132)
unless there is profuse watery diarrhoea. In
this case, repeat Ringer's lactate. The If there is NO improvement:
circulation should be assessed again. Call senior health worker.
(cid:132)
Give maintenance IV fluid 4ml/kg/hour while
(cid:132)
If there is still NO improvement: waiting for blood.
Transfuse fresh whole blood at 10ml/kg/hour
See inpatient treatment guidelines for (cid:132)
(cid:132)
slowly over 3 hours (use packed cells if in cardiac
underlying condition.
failure).



Table 4
Maintenance fluids
If the child has NO severe malnutrition If the child HAS severe
See Chart 11 malnutrition
Give 70 ml/kg of Ringer's lactate solution Continue ReSoMal 5-10ml/kg/hour
(or, if not available, normal saline) for the next 4-10 hours.
over 5 hours in infants (aged <12 See guidelines in the "Pocket book
(cid:132)
months); of hospital care for children" or the
over 2½ hours in children (aged 12 manual "Management of the child
(cid:132)
months to 5 years). with a serious infection or severe
Reassess the child every 1-2 hours. If the malnutrition."
condition is not improving, give the IV fluids
more rapidly.
Also give ORS solution (about 5 ml/kg/
hour) as soon as the child can drink; this is
usually:
after 3-4 hours (in infants);
(cid:132)
after 1-2 hours (in children).
(cid:132)
Encourage breastfeeding:
Reassess after 6 hours (infants) and after
3 hours (children)
(cid:132) Does the child have warm hands?
(cid:132) Is the capillary refill time more than 3 seconds?
(cid:132) Is the pulse fast and weak?
In other words, is the child shocked?
IF SHOCKED
If the child has NO severe malnutrition If the child HAS severe malnutrition
(cid:132) Stop any bleeding (cid:132) Stop any bleeding
(cid:132) Give oxygen (cid:132) Give oxygen
(cid:132) Keep child warm (cid:132) Keep child warm
(cid:132) Give IV fluids rapidly (cid:132) Assess if child can drink oral or
NGT fluids
(cid:132) Give IV fluids if child unable to
tolerate oral or fluids by
nasogastric tube
SUMMARY Assessing all children


#### [Table Content]
|  |  | SUMMARY |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Assessing all children |  |  |
| (cid:132) Does the child have warm hands? (cid:132) Is the capillary refill time more than 3 seconds? (cid:132) Is the pulse fast and weak? In other words, is the child shocked? |  |  |
| IF SHOCKED |  |  |
| If the child has NO severe malnutrition (cid:132) Stop any bleeding (cid:132) Give oxygen (cid:132) Keep child warm (cid:132) Give IV fluids rapidly | If the child HAS severe malnutrition (cid:132) Stop any bleeding (cid:132) Give oxygen (cid:132) Keep child warm (cid:132) Assess if child can drink oral or NGT fluids (cid:132) Give IV fluids if child unable to tolerate oral or fluids by nasogastric tube |  |




OITALUCRIC
:SNOITSEUQ
TNEMSSESSA
Answer all the questions on this page, writing in the given spaces. If you have a
problem, ask for help from one of the facilitators.
1. Define a normal capillary refill time.
2. If you cannot feel the radial pulse in an older child, which pulse should you look for next?
3. Name the two types of fluid you can give to treat shock initially.
4. Which fluid would you give to a child in shock with signs of severe malnutrition?
5. What volume of fluid would you give to a well nourished one-year old weighing 11 kg who is in shock?



SSESSMENT
QUESTIONS:
CIRCULATION
6. How many times can you give this bolus of fluid in shock before calling a senior health worker?
7. In triage of a two-year old girl you find her hands are warm, what do you do next?
8. In triage of an 18-month old, well-fed boy, you find his hands are cold. What do you do next?
9. In triage of a 10-year old boy who was rushed to emergency after falling from a coconut palm half an
hour earlier, you find his hands are cold and the capillary refill time is longer than three seconds. What do
you do next?
10.What are two contra-indications for setting up an intraosseous infusion?



11.Can you give blood through an intraosseous infusion? And antibiotics, in case these are needed?
12.A four-months old baby is brought to hospital with fever, rapid breathing and refusing to breastfeed. She
has had 2 episodes of vomiting and watery diarrhoea. Weight 5 kg. Her hands are cold. The capillary
refill is 6 seconds. The femoral pulse is palpable but fast and weak. There is no chest indrawing and
there are no abormal respiratory noises. How do you triage the baby? How do you manage the baby?
OITALUCRIC
:SNOITSEUQ
TNEMSSESSA



Coma and convulsion
Here we shall look at the second and third components in which C represents
A Airway
“coma and convulsion”.
B Breathing
The following signs indicate impaired neurological status: coma, lethargy, and
C Circulation
convulsions.
Coma
Convulsion
Assess the child for coma and convulsion
D Dehydration (severe)
To assess the child’s neurological status you need to know:
(cid:132) Is the child in coma? A child who is awake
(cid:132) Is the child convulsing? and alert, or is playing
and talking, obviously
does not have a
dangerous or disturbed
level of consciousness
Table 5
Assessment and treatment of coma and convulsion
C (cid:132) Coma or (cid:190) Manage the airway
2 (cid:132) Convulsing (now) If coma or (cid:190) Give oxygen
COMA convulsing (cid:190) If convulsing, give diazepam
C rectally
3 (cid:190) Position the child (if head or neck
CONVULSION trauma is suspected, stabilize the
neck first)
(cid:190) Give IV glucose
IS THE CHILD IN COMA?
A child who is awake is obviously conscious and you can move to the next
component of the assessment. If the child is asleep, ask the mother if the child
is just sleeping. If there is any doubt, you need to assess the level of consciousness:


#### [Table Content]
| A B C | Airway Breathing Circulation |
| --- | --- |
|  | Coma Convulsion |
| D | Dehydration (severe) |

| Table 5 Assessment and treatment of coma and convulsion |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| C 2 COMA C 3 CONVULSION | (cid:132) Coma or (cid:132) Convulsing (now) | If coma or convulsing | (cid:190) Manage the airway (cid:190) Give oxygen (cid:190) If convulsing, give diazepam rectally (cid:190) Position the child (if head or neck trauma is suspected, stabilize the neck first) (cid:190) Give IV glucose |




who does not respond to this should be gently shaken. A little shake to the arm
or leg should be enough to wake a sleeping child. Do not move the child’s neck.
If this is unsuccessful, apply a firm squeeze to the nail bed, enough to cause
some pain. A child who does not wake to voice or being shaken or to pain is
unconscious. To help you assess the conscious level of a child is, a simple scale
(AVPU) is used:
A Is the child Alert? If not,
V Is the child responding to Voice? If not,
P Is the child responding to Pain?
U The child who is Unresponsive to voice (or being shaken) AND
to pain is Unconscious.
A child who is not alert, but responds to voice, is lethargic. An unconscious
child may or may not respond to pain. A child with a coma scale of “P” or
“U” will receive emergency treatment for coma as described below.
The assessments and signs discussed above are clearly illustrated on video. You
should now watch the relevant section of the video. These assessments cannot
be demonstrated in photographic form, so if you do not have a video player,
you will have to ask the staff in your department to demonstrate this on real
patients. You should also practise your assessment of consciousness on real
patients.
IS THE CHILD CONVULSING NOW?
This assessment depends on your observation of the child and not on the history
from the parent. Children who have a history of convulsion, but are alert during
triage, need a complete clinical history and investigation, but no emergency
treatment for convulsions. The child must be seen to have a convulsion during
the triage process or while waiting in the outpatient department. You can recognize
a convulsion by the sudden loss of consciousness associated with uncontrolled
jerky movements of the limbs and/or the face. There is stiffening of the child’s
arms and legs and uncontrolled movements of the limbs. The child may lose
control of the bladder, and is unconscious during and after the convulsion.
Sometimes, in infants, the jerky movements may be absent, but there may be
twitching (abnormal facial movements) and abnormal movements of the eyes,
hands or feet. You have to observe the infant carefully.
Treatment of coma and convulsion
Treatment of coma and convulsions are similar and will be described together.
COMA CONVULSION
If the child is unconscious you should: If the child is convulsing now, you must:
(cid:132) Manage the airway (cid:132) Manage the airway
(cid:132) Position the child (if there is a history of (cid:132) Position the child
trauma, stabilize neck first) (cid:132) Check blood sugar
(cid:132) Check the blood sugar (cid:132) Give IV glucose
(cid:132) Give IV glucose (cid:132) Give anticonvulsant



Coma
Managing the airway is done in the same way as treating any child with an
airway or breathing problem. This has been discussed in Module 2. You may
find it useful to read through this again. Give oxygen for the emergency setting.
Convulsion
To manage the airway of a convulsing child, do not try to insert anything in the
mouth to keep it open. If the lips and tongue are not blue, do not try to manage
the airway by lifting the chin or using a jaw thrust.
POSITION THE CHILD
Coma
Any unconscious child who is breathing and keeping the
airway open should be placed in the recovery position.
This position helps to reduce the risk of vomit entering
the child’s lungs (see Figure 27). It should only be used in
children who have not been subjected to trauma.
If neck trauma is not suspected:
(cid:132) Turn the child on the side to reduce risk of
aspiration
(cid:132) Keep the neck slightly extended and stabilize by
placing the cheek on one hand Figure 27
(cid:132) Bend one leg to stabilize the body position Positioning the unconscious child (recovery
position)
If trauma is suspected:
(cid:132) Stabilize the child while lying on the back
(cid:132) Use the “log roll” technique to turn the child on the side if the child is
vomiting
Convulsion
If the child is having a convulsion, do not attempt to hold him/her down or put
anything in the child’s mouth. If the child vomits turn the child on his/her side
to avoid aspiration. If the convulsion has stopped and the airway is clear, the
child can be placed in the recovery position (see Figure 19).
CHECK THE BLOOD SUGAR
Coma and convulsion When the blood glucose
cannot be measured,
Where blood glucose results can be obtained quickly (e.g. with dextrostix), this
should be measured immediately. Hypoglycaemia is present if the measured hypoglycaemia should
blood glucose level is low <2.5 mmol/l (45 mg/dl) in a well nourished or <3 be assumed to be
mmol/litre (55 mg/dl) in a severely malnourished child). present in all children in
This test is easy to perform. Your department will require a supply of dextrostix. coma or having a
You will need a drop of blood, taken from the heel of a young infant or by finger convulsion AND should
prick from an older infant or child, or from blood obtained at the insertion of an
be treated
intravenous line.


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 27 Positioning the unconscious child (recovery position) |




left for 60 seconds. It is not necessary to cover the entire test strip.
After 60 seconds, wash the blood off gently with drops of cold water
or blot off the blood. Depending on the instructions for the use of
the stick, wait for another 60 seconds, and compare the colour of
the test area with the key on the side of the container, or use a
battery-operated reader. If the blood glucose is less than 2.5 mmol/
litre, the child has a low blood glucose and needs treatment. If you
compare the ranges on the colour code, usually you can only
Figure 28
distinguish <2 mmol/l, and 2-4 mmol/l. In a well-nourished child,
Blood glucose stick with colour scale
the result should read over 2 mmol/l. Remember that the blood
printed on the box
sugar in a malnourished child is already between 2 and 4. It is better
to treat a child whose sugar is borderline than to withhold it.
Malnourished children have no energy stores, so, unlike well-
nourished children, they cannot maintain their blood sugar in a
crisis.
GIVE IV GLUCOSE
Figure 29
Coma and convulsion
Blood glucose stick with a reading
machine (cid:132) Insert an IV line and draw blood for emergency laboratory
investigations.
(cid:132) Give 5 ml/kg of 10% glucose solution rapidly by IV
injection (see Table 6, including dilutions of 50% glucose to
make 10% solution and Chart 10 in Annex 3).
(cid:132) Recheck the blood glucose in 30 minutes. If it is still low,
repeat 5 ml/kg of 10% glucose solution.
(cid:132) Feed the child as soon as conscious.
If the child is not able to feed without danger of aspiration, give:
(cid:132) IV fluid containing 5-10% glucose (dextrose), or
(cid:132) Milk or sugar solution via nasogastric tube.
To make sugar solution, dissolve four level teaspoons of sugar (20
grams) in a 200-ml cup of clean water.
Figure 30
This is a useful guideline in an emergency situation when you may
Suitable areas for a heel stab in a
not have a chance to weigh the child. It may be helpful to put it on
young infant
the wall in your department.
Table 6
Amount of glucose to give by age
Volume of 10% glucose
To make up 10% glucose using 50% glucose solution
Age/weight solution to be given as
bolus (5 ml/kg) Volume of 50% glucose With added volume of water
Less than 2 months (<4kg) 15 ml 3ml 12ml
2 - <4 months (4 - <6 kg) 25 ml 5ml 20ml
4 - <12 months (6 - <10 kg) 40 ml 8ml 32ml
1 - <3 years (10 - <14 kg) 60 ml 12ml 48ml
3 - <5 years (14 - <19 kg) 80 ml 16ml 64ml


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 29 Blood glucose stick with a reading machine |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 30 Suitable areas for a heel stab in a young infant |

| Table 6 Amount of glucose to give by age |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Age/weight | Volume of 10% glucose solution to be given as bolus (5 ml/kg) | To make up 10% glucose using 50% glucose solution |  |
|  |  | Volume of 50% glucose | With added volume of water |
| Less than 2 months (<4kg) 2 - <4 months (4 - <6 kg) 4 - <12 months (6 - <10 kg) 1 - <3 years (10 - <14 kg) 3 - <5 years (14 - <19 kg) | 15 ml 25 ml 40 ml 60 ml 80 ml | 3ml 5ml 8ml 12ml 16ml | 12ml 20ml 32ml 48ml 64ml |




50% glucose solution is available: dilute 1 part 50% glucose solution to 4 parts
sterile water, or dilute 1 part 50% glucose solution to 9 parts 5% glucose solution.
If you only have smaller syringes, divide the amounts accordingly, always mixing
1 part of 50% glucose with 4 parts of sterile water.
GIVE AN ANTICONVULSANT
Convulsion
Diazepam is a drug to stop convulsions (anticonvulsant). It is the first drug to
use if the child is convulsing in front of you. No drug should be given if the
convulsion has stopped. Diazepam can be given by the rectal or intravenous
route. Rectal diazepam acts within 2 to 4 minutes. In an emergency it is easier
and quicker to give it rectally than intravenously, unless an intravenous line is
already running. The dose is 0.5mg/kg (0.1 ml/kg) rectally or 0.25mg/kg (0.05
ml/kg) intravenously. Estimated doses of rectal diazepam and paraldehyde are
shown in Table 7 below. This is a useful guideline in an emergency situation
when you may not have a chance to weigh the child. It may be helpful to put it
on the wall in your department.
Table 7
Diazepam and paraldehyde dosages by age for the treatment of convulsions
Diazepam given rectally Paraldehyde given rectally
Age/weight (10 mg/2ml solution)
Dose 0.1 ml/kg Dose 0.3-0.4 ml/kg
2 weeks to 2 months (<4kg) 0.3 ml (1.5 mg) 1.0 ml
2 - <4 months (4 - <6 kg) 0.5 ml (2.5 mg) 1.6 ml
4 - <12 months (6 - <10 kg) 1.0 ml (5.5 mg) 2.4 ml
1 - <3 years (10 - <14 kg) 1.25 ml (6.25 mg) 4 ml
3 - <5 years (14 - <19 kg) 1.5 ml (7.5 mg) 5 ml
Base the dose on the weight of the child, where possible. Draw up the dose from
an ampoule of diazepam into a tuberculin (1 ml)1 syringe. Then remove the
needle. Insert the syringe 4 to 5 cm (about the length of your little finger) into
the rectum and inject the diazepam solution. Hold the buttocks together for a
few minutes. If you already have intravenous access, you can give the correct
volume of drug directly, but slowly, in at least one full minute.
Reassess the child after 10 minutes.
If still convulsing, give a second dose of diazepam, rectally or, even better, give
Phenobarbital is the
paraldehyde (or diazepam intravenously slowly over 1 minute if an IV infusion
is running). If the convulsion continues in spite of this second dose, a third dose drug of first choice in
can be given. Alternatively phenobarbital IV or IM can be used. The infants <2 weeks of age
recommended dose is 15-20mg/kg. At this stage, a senior health worker should to control convulsions
be involved.
Diazepam can affect the child’s breathing, so it is important to reassess the
airway and breathing regularly.
1 A 2 ml syringe can be used if a tuberculin syringe is not available.


#### [Table Content]
| Table 7 Diazepam and paraldehyde dosages by age for the treatment of convulsions |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Age/weight | Diazepam given rectally (10 mg/2ml solution) Dose 0.1 ml/kg | Paraldehyde given rectally Dose 0.3-0.4 ml/kg |
| 2 weeks to 2 months (<4kg) 2 - <4 months (4 - <6 kg) 4 - <12 months (6 - <10 kg) 1 - <3 years (10 - <14 kg) 3 - <5 years (14 - <19 kg) | 0.3 ml (1.5 mg) 0.5 ml (2.5 mg) 1.0 ml (5.5 mg) 1.25 ml (6.25 mg) 1.5 ml (7.5 mg) | 1.0 ml 1.6 ml 2.4 ml 4 ml 5 ml |




In a child having a
convulsion the blood
sugar can be checked
immediately or after the
first dose of diazepam
has been given
COMA CONVULSION
If the child is unconscious, you need to: If the child is convulsing, you need to:
(cid:132) Manage the airway (cid:132) Manage the airway
(cid:132) Check the blood sugar (cid:132) Check the blood sugar
(cid:132) Position the child (cid:132) Give diazepam
(cid:132) Position the child
YRAMMUS
Table 8
Dose of Phenobarbital for young infants
Weight of infant 2 kg or less 3 kg or less
Initial dose of phenobarbital, 20mg/kg, 200mg/ml solution 0.2 ml 0.3 ml
Repeat dose if convulsions continue 0.1 ml 0.15 ml
If there is high fever:
(cid:132) Sponge the child with room-temperature water to reduce the fever.
(cid:132) Do not give oral medication until the convulsion has been controlled
(danger of aspiration).
If you have a video player, you should now watch the section entitled
“Management of neurological problems”. The video shows how to check the
blood sugar, give rectal diazepam, and position the child correctly. If you do not
have a video player, photographs also illustrate these procedures. As before,
there is no substitute for practice. You can practise the recovery position on real
patients, as well as checking blood sugars on any blood samples obtained in
your department.
If the child does not have shock, and is not unconscious or convulsing, quickly continue
the assessment for emergency signs. If the child is unconscious or is convulsing, you
should initiate appropriate treatment, and then quickly resume the assessment.


#### [Table Content]
| YRAMMUS |  |
| --- | --- |
|  | COMA CONVULSION |
|  | If the child is unconscious, you need to: If the child is convulsing, you need to: (cid:132) Manage the airway (cid:132) Manage the airway (cid:132) Check the blood sugar (cid:132) Check the blood sugar (cid:132) Position the child (cid:132) Give diazepam (cid:132) Position the child |
|  | If the child does not have shock, and is not unconscious or convulsing, quickly continue the assessment for emergency signs. If the child is unconscious or is convulsing, you should initiate appropriate treatment, and then quickly resume the assessment. |




SSESSMENT
QUESTIONS:
COMA
AND
CONVULSION
Answer all the questions on this page, writing in the given spaces. If you have a
problem, ask for help from one of the facilitators.
1. What do the letters AVPU stand for?
2. What is the cut-off level for low blood sugar?
3. How much 10% glucose would you give to a six-month-old weighing 8 kg and having a low blood sugar?
4. A child who is unconscious, with no history of trauma, but maintaining the airway should be put in which
position?
5. How much rectal diazepam (in ml of the 10mg/2ml solution) would you give to a four-yearold weighing 15
kg who is having a convulsion? How long should you wait before giving a second dose if the convulsion
does not stop?
6. A 15-month old girl has been sleeping all day. She does not answer to a call from her mother. But she
responds to a pinch on her chest. What stage of AVPU do you assign her? While on examination, she
started to move her limbs abnormally and her eyes rolled sideways and there were frothy secretions in her
mouth. What is the most appropriate measure to take?



OISLUVNOC
DNA
AMOC
:SNOITSEUQ
TNEMSSESSA
7. A two-year old boy is carried in by his grandmother. He weighs 12 kg. He is hot and having a seizure.
What are the next steps to stop the convulsion? And when the convulsion stops, what do you do?
8. A three-year old girl was brought in because she was abnormally sleepy and not responding at all. The
father said he took her to a nearby clinic for cough and vomiting and he was being given tablets. She did
not take any food. What is the next most appropriate step?
9. An 18-month old boy has been unwell and feverish for two days. He complains of abdominal pain and his
mother has noticed that he has fast breathing. He weighs 11 kg. His airway is fine, and he has no chest
indrawing. There is no history of diarrhoea. However, the boy started to convulse while being examined.
What are the most appropriate measures?
10.A 10-week old baby was brought in. His mother says he will not suckle today because he is crying a lot. He
feels very hot on touch. He weighs 3.5 kg. Airway, breathing and circulation are normal. There is no history
of diarrhoea and no dehydration. How do you triage the baby? What are the next steps?
11. A 14-month old girl has been sleeping all day. She is irritable when awoken, but rouses to loud voice or
shaking her arm. Her hands are warm but look a bit pale. The mother says she has no diarrhoea or
vomiting. Her breathing is deep and her lower chest wall goes in when she breathes in. How do you
triage this child? What are the next steps?



Dehydration
The letter D in the ABCD formula stands for Dehydration. These assessments
A Airway
can take place if those for A B and C were all normal, or if emergency treatments
B Breathing
have been given for any problem encountered. If there are no signs of dehydration,
C Circulation
you can move on to look for priority signs.
Coma
In this section we will look at the assessment of severe dehydration in the child
Convulsion
with diarrhoea or vomiting. If the child is severely malnourished these signs are
not as reliable. D Dehydration (severe)
DOES THE CHILD HAVE DIARRHOEA?
This information comes from the parent or guardian. If the child has no diarrhoea,
do not check for dehydration and you can move to the next assessment.
Assess for severe dehydration
To assess if the child is severely dehydrated you need to know:
(cid:132) Is the child lethargic?
(cid:132) Does the child have sunken eyes?
(cid:132) Does a skin pinch take longer than 2 seconds to go back?
In Table 9 below, the signs are listed on the left and the corresponding treatments
on the right. Complete the assessment of all the signs on the left before deciding
on and initiating treatment.
Table 9
Severe dehydration
D Diarrhoea plus any two of these: IF NO SEVERE MALNUTRITION:
Diarrhoea plus 2 (cid:132) Insert IV line and begin giving
SEVERE (cid:132) Lethargy positive signs fluids rapidly following Plan C.
(cid:132) Sunken eyes
DEHYDRATION
(cid:132) Very slow skin pinch IF SEVERE MALNUTRITION:
(in child with (cid:132) Do not insert IV, but proceed
diarrhoea immediately to assessment and
only) treatment.


#### [Table Content]
| A B C | Airway Breathing Circulation Coma Convulsion |
| --- | --- |
| D | Dehydration (severe) |

| Table 9 Severe dehydration |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| D SEVERE DEHYDRATION (in child with diarrhoea only) | Diarrhoea plus any two of these: (cid:132) Lethargy (cid:132) Sunken eyes (cid:132) Very slow skin pinch | Diarrhoea plus 2 positive signs | IF NO SEVERE MALNUTRITION: (cid:132) Insert IV line and begin giving fluids rapidly following Plan C. IF SEVERE MALNUTRITION: (cid:132) Do not insert IV, but proceed immediately to assessment and treatment. |




If the child has diarrhoea, assess the following signs to determine if the child has
severe dehydration.
IS THE CHILD LETHARGIC?
In the older child lethargy is quite easy to assess. You have already assessed the
state of consciousness of the child using the AVPU scale. Now observe if the
child appears drowsy and does not show interest in what
is happening around him/her. A lethargic child may not
look at the mother or watch your face when you talk. The
child may stare blankly and appear not to notice what is
going on around him/her.
Does the child know his/her name and answer questions
sensibly? If the child responds to voice but remains drowsy,
he/she is lethargic. In the younger child, signs of lethargy
are harder to assess.
DOES THE CHILD HAVE SUNKEN EYES?
Look at the child’s eyes to determine if they appear
Figure 31 unusually sunken in their sockets (see Figure 31). Ask the
Sunken eyes mother if the child’s eyes are more sunken than usual, or if
the skin around them appears darker than usual.
DOES A SKIN PINCH GO BACK VERY SLOWLY (LONGER
THAN 2 SECONDS)?
This is a simple test to look at how elastic the skin is. If
the child is not dehydrated, the skin will be elastic and,
when pinched and released, will return to normal straight
away. Try this on yourself. The dehydrated child will have
lost fluid. The body moves fluid from less important places,
such as the skin, to maintain the circulation. The skin
becomes less elastic and, when pinched, is slow to return.
Locate the area on the child’s abdomen halfway between
the umbilicus and the side of the abdomen. Avoiding using
your fingertips, as this is painful. Pinch the skin in a vertical
(head to foot) direction and not across the child’s body.
You should pick up all the layers of the skin and the tissue
underneath. Pinch for one second and then release. See
whether the skin goes back very slowly (longer than 2
seconds).
If the child has diarrhoea plus two of the above signs
(lethargy, sunken eyes, and very slow skin pinch), the child
has severe dehydration.
Figure 32
Severe dehydration is present if the child has a history of
Skin pinch
diarrhoea plus any two of the following signs: lethargy,
sunken eyes or slow skin pinch (longer than two seconds).


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 31 Sunken eyes |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 32 Skin pinch |




must also check for severe malnutrition. It is difficult to assess dehydration in a
child with severe malnutrition.
The assessments and signs discussed above are clearly illustrated on video. You
should now watch the section entitled “Assessment of dehydration”. If you do
not have a video player, the photographs supplied illustrate sunken eyes and the
skin pinch. As in previous sections you will get the opportunity to see all the
signs on real patients.
Treatment of severe dehydration in an emergency
setting
If the child has shock, treat this first (see Module 3: Circulation).
SEVERE DEHYDRATION (WITHOUT SHOCK OR SEVERE MALNUTRITION)
Give the child a large quantity of fluids quickly. The fluids replace the body’s
large fluid loss. This is shown in Diarrhoea Treatment Plan C (Chart 11 in
Annex 3). The first portion of the IV fluid (30 ml/kg) is given very rapidly. This
will restore the blood volume and prevent death from shock. Then 70 ml/kg is
given more slowly to complete the rehydration. In all cases the fluid of choice is
Ringer’s lactate.
Give oral fluids
As soon as the child can drink you should give oral fluids in addition to the drip.
Use ORS and give 5 ml/kg every hour.
Example
The following example describes how to treat a child with SEVERE DEHYDRATION according
to Plan C.
A six-month old (9 kg) girl, Ellen, had diarrhoea with SEVERE DEHYDRATION. She was not in
shock and did not have severe malnutrition. She was not able to drink. The health worker decided
to treat the infant with IV fluid according to Plan C.
The health worker gave Ellen 270 ml (30 ml x 9 kg) of Ringer’s lactate by IV during the first hour.
Over the following five hours, he gave her 630 ml of IV fluid (70 ml x 9 kg), approximately 125 ml
per hour. The health worker assessed the infant’s hydration status every 1-2 hours (that is, he
assessed for dehydration). Her hydration status was improving, so the health worker continued
giving Ellen the fluid at a steady rate.
After 4 hours of IV treatment, Ellen was able to drink. The health worker continued giving her IV
fluid and began giving her approximately 45 ml of ORS solution to drink per hour.
After Ellen had been on IV fluid for 6 hours, the health worker reassessed her dehydration. She
had improved and was reclassified as SOME DEHYDRATION. The health worker chose Plan B
to continue treatment. The health worker stopped the IV fluid. He began giving Ellen ORS solution
as indicated in Plan B.
GIVE FLUIDS BY NASOGASTRIC TUBE IF YOU CANNOT SET UP AN INTRAVENOUS
INFUSION
Sometimes it can be very hard to set a drip. In this case call for help and while
waiting,start nasogastric fluid replacement. Use Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS)
in all cases. Give 20 ml/kg every hour for six hours.


#### [Table Content]
| Example |
| --- |
| The following example describes how to treat a child with SEVERE DEHYDRATION according to Plan C. A six-month old (9 kg) girl, Ellen, had diarrhoea with SEVERE DEHYDRATION. She was not in shock and did not have severe malnutrition. She was not able to drink. The health worker decided to treat the infant with IV fluid according to Plan C. The health worker gave Ellen 270 ml (30 ml x 9 kg) of Ringer’s lactate by IV during the first hour. Over the following five hours, he gave her 630 ml of IV fluid (70 ml x 9 kg), approximately 125 ml per hour. The health worker assessed the infant’s hydration status every 1-2 hours (that is, he assessed for dehydration). Her hydration status was improving, so the health worker continued giving Ellen the fluid at a steady rate. After 4 hours of IV treatment, Ellen was able to drink. The health worker continued giving her IV fluid and began giving her approximately 45 ml of ORS solution to drink per hour. After Ellen had been on IV fluid for 6 hours, the health worker reassessed her dehydration. She had improved and was reclassified as SOME DEHYDRATION. The health worker chose Plan B to continue treatment. The health worker stopped the IV fluid. He began giving Ellen ORS solution as indicated in Plan B. |




you give emergency treatment to a child with severe dehydration, you will begin
the initial rehydration1. Determine the age and weight of the child. Determine
the initial amount of fluid to give the child. Insert an IV line and start giving
fluids.
Table 9
Treatment of severe dehydration in an emergency setting
Age < 12 Months 1 year to 5 years
Drops per minute2 Drops per minute
Weight Total volume Per hour Paediatric Adult Total volume Per hour Paediatric Adult
<4 kg 200 40 ml 40 13
4 - <6 kg 350 70 ml 70 23
6 - <10 kg 550 110 ml 110 37 550 220 220 73
10 - <14 kg 850 170 ml 170 57 850 340 340 113
14 - <19 kg 1200 240 ml 240 80 1200 480 480 160
Reassess the child every hour. If the hydration status is not improving, give the
IV drip more rapidly.
Also give ORS solution (about 5ml/kg/hour) as soon as the child can drink; this
is usually after 3-4 hours (in infants) or 1-2 hours (in children).
Table 10
ORS volumes for the management of severe dehydration when the child
can drink
WEIGHT VOLUME ORS SOLUTION PER HOUR
<4 kg 15 ml
4 <6 kg 25 ml
6 <10 kg 40 ml
10 <14 kg 60 ml
14 <19 kg 85 ml
Reassess after 6 hours (infants) and after 3 hours (children). Classify dehydration.
Then choose the appropriate diarrhoea treatment plan to continue treatment.
If possible, observe the child for at least 6 hours after rehydration to be sure
that the mother can maintain hydration by giving the child ORS solution by
mouth.
1 You or other staff will continue giving the child fluids, reassessing periodically and completing the rehydration.
However, continuing the treatment is not described here as part of emergency treatment.
2 The number of drops to be given per minute is based on the assumption that droppers in IV sets provide a fixed
number of drops per ml. Micro droppers for infants give 60 drops per ml. The number of drops per minute is
therefore equal to the number of ml per hour (60 drops divided by 60 minutes). IV sets for adults in most countries
give 20 drops per ml. The figures in the table are based on this number. In case IV sets are used that give larger


#### [Table Content]
| Table 9 Treatment of severe dehydration in an emergency setting |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Age | < 12 Months |  |  |  | 1 year to 5 years |  |  |  |
|  |  |  | Drops per minute2 |  |  |  | Drops per minute |  |
| Weight | Total volume | Per hour | Paediatric | Adult | Total volume | Per hour | Paediatric | Adult |
| <4 kg 4 - <6 kg 6 - <10 kg 10 - <14 kg 14 - <19 kg | 200 350 550 850 1200 | 40 ml 70 ml 110 ml 170 ml 240 ml | 40 70 110 170 240 | 13 23 37 57 80 | 550 850 1200 | 220 340 480 | 220 340 480 | 73 113 160 |




Do NOT give IV fluids if possible.
Give ReSoMal which can be made (see below for recipe) or is commercially
available. The ReSoMal rehydration fluid should be given orally or by nasogastric
tube, much more slowly than you would when rehydrating a well-nourished
child.
When assessing the blood sugar in a malnourished child, remember that a low
blood sugar level is between 2 and 4 mmol/l. It is better to give 10% glucose (see
Module 3) to a child whose sugar is borderline than to withhold it. As these
children have no energy stores, they cannot, unlike well-nourished children,
maintain their blood sugar in a crisis.
Table 11
ReSoMal Recipe
INGREDIENT AMOUNT
Water 2
WHO-ORS One-1L packet
Sucrose (household sugar) 50g
Electrolyte/mineral solution 40ml
Table 12
Treatment of severe dehydration
If the child has NO severe malnutrition If the child HAS severe malnutrition
Does the child have shock? Does the child have shock?
IfYES IfYES
(cid:132) See TREATMENT OF SHOCK (Table 3) (cid:132) See TREATMENT OF SHOCK (Table 3)
in Module 3: Circulation in Module 3: Circulation
IfNO IfNO
(cid:132) Give Ringer's lactate (cid:132) Do not give IV fluids
(cid:132) For infants: For all children:
- 30 ml/kg in the first hour (cid:132) Give ReSoMal 5ml/kg every 30 minutes
- 70 ml/kg in the next 5 hours for the first 2 hours
(cid:132) Then 5-10ml/kg/hour for the next 4-10
(cid:132) For children > 1 year of age: hours
- 30 ml/kg in the first 30 minutes (cid:132) Give more ReSoMal if child wants more
- 70 ml/kg in the next 2.5 hours or large stool loss or vomiting
(cid:132) Check blood glucose
(cid:132) Assess the child every 1 2 hours (cid:132) Treat if <3mmol/l (see Module 3)
If the signs of dehydration are not For further treatment see inpatient
improving: guidelines
(cid:132) give fluid more rapidly
(cid:132) inform doctor or senior staff
As soon as the child can drink:
(cid:132) give oral fluids in addition to the drip
(cid:132) give ORS 5 ml/kg every hour


#### [Table Content]
| Table 12 Treatment of severe dehydration |  |
| --- | --- |
| If the child has NO severe malnutrition | If the child HAS severe malnutrition |
| Does the child have shock? IfYES (cid:132) See TREATMENT OF SHOCK (Table 3) in Module 3: Circulation IfNO (cid:132) Give Ringer's lactate (cid:132) For infants: - 30 ml/kg in the first hour - 70 ml/kg in the next 5 hours (cid:132) For children > 1 year of age: - 30 ml/kg in the first 30 minutes - 70 ml/kg in the next 2.5 hours (cid:132) Assess the child every 1 2 hours If the signs of dehydration are not improving: (cid:132) give fluid more rapidly (cid:132) inform doctor or senior staff As soon as the child can drink: (cid:132) give oral fluids in addition to the drip (cid:132) give ORS 5 ml/kg every hour | Does the child have shock? IfYES (cid:132) See TREATMENT OF SHOCK (Table 3) in Module 3: Circulation IfNO (cid:132) Do not give IV fluids For all children: (cid:132) Give ReSoMal 5ml/kg every 30 minutes for the first 2 hours (cid:132) Then 5-10ml/kg/hour for the next 4-10 hours (cid:132) Give more ReSoMal if child wants more or large stool loss or vomiting (cid:132) Check blood glucose (cid:132) Treat if <3mmol/l (see Module 3) For further treatment see inpatient guidelines |




If the child does not
have diarrhoea or is not
dehydrated, quickly
continue the
assessment for priority
signs. If the child is
dehydrated, you should
initiate appropriate
treatment, and then
quickly resume the
In a child with severe dehydration WITHOUT severe malnutrition:
assessment
(cid:132) Treat shock if present
(cid:132) Give intravenous or nasogastric fluids
(cid:132) Start oral fluids as soon as possible.
In a child with severe dehydration WITH severe malnutrition:
(cid:132) Treat shock if present
(cid:132) Give oral or nasogastric fluids.
YRAMMUS
Table 13
Maintenance fluids
If the child has NO severe malnutrition If the child HAS severe
See Chart 11 malnutrition
Give 70 ml/kg of Ringer's lactate solution (or, if not Continue ReSoMal 5-10ml/kg/hour
available, normal saline) for the next 4-10 hours.
(cid:132) over 5 hours in infants (aged <12 months); See guidelines in the "Pocket book
(cid:132) over 2½ hours in children (aged 12 months to 5 of hospital care for children" or the
years). manual "Management of the child
Reassess the child every 1-2 hours. If the condition with a serious infection or severe
is not improving, give the IV fluids more rapidly. malnutrition."
Also give ORS solution (about 5 ml/kg/hour) as
soon as the child can drink; this is usually:
(cid:132) after 3-4 hours (in infants);
(cid:132) after 1-2 hours (in children).
Encourage breastfeeding:
Reassess after 6 hours (infants) and after 3 hours
(children)


#### [Table Content]
| Table 13 Maintenance fluids |  |
| --- | --- |
| If the child has NO severe malnutrition See Chart 11 | If the child HAS severe malnutrition |
| Give 70 ml/kg of Ringer's lactate solution (or, if not available, normal saline) (cid:132) over 5 hours in infants (aged <12 months); (cid:132) over 2½ hours in children (aged 12 months to 5 years). Reassess the child every 1-2 hours. If the condition is not improving, give the IV fluids more rapidly. Also give ORS solution (about 5 ml/kg/hour) as soon as the child can drink; this is usually: (cid:132) after 3-4 hours (in infants); (cid:132) after 1-2 hours (in children). Encourage breastfeeding: Reassess after 6 hours (infants) and after 3 hours (children) | Continue ReSoMal 5-10ml/kg/hour for the next 4-10 hours. See guidelines in the "Pocket book of hospital care for children" or the manual "Management of the child with a serious infection or severe malnutrition." |

| YRAMMUS | In a child with severe dehydration WITHOUT severe malnutrition: (cid:132) Treat shock if present (cid:132) Give intravenous or nasogastric fluids (cid:132) Start oral fluids as soon as possible. In a child with severe dehydration WITH severe malnutrition: (cid:132) Treat shock if present (cid:132) Give oral or nasogastric fluids. |
| --- | --- |




SSESSMENT
QUESTIONS:
DEHYDRATION
Answer all the questions on this page, writing in the given spaces. If you have a
problem, ask for help from one of the facilitators.
1. An abnormal skin pinch takes longer than _____________ to go back.
2. An eight-month old weighing 6 kg is severely dehydrated. How much fluid would you give in the first
hour? For how long would you give the second lot of fluid in the same child?
3. A three-year old weighing 15 kg is severely dehydrated. He has received 450 ml of fluid in 30 minutes.
How much fluid are you going to give him next, and over what period of time?
4. If you cannot set up a drip, how much nasogastric fluid (ml/kg) should you give a child in an hour?



OITARDYHED
:SNOITSEUQ
TNEMSSESSA
5. Barec is three-years old and weighs 15 kg. His mother said that his diarrhoea started yesterday. The
health worker's assessment found that Barec was not in shock and that he was breathing adequately. He
was lethargic and not able to drink, had sunken eyes and a skin pinch went back very slowly. He was not
severely malnourished but had diarrhoea with severe dehydration. How should the health worker treat
Barec's dehydration?
What amount of fluid should Barec be given initially?
6. Amaru is two-year old and weighs 8 kg. He is breathing comfortably and not in shock, but has diarrhoea.
A health worker finds Amaru to be lethargic, but able to drink. His eyes are sunken, and a skin pinch
goes back very slowly. The health worker decides that Amaru has diarrhoea with severe dehydration,
then checks for severe malnutrition and sees visible severe wasting. What is the appropriate treatment
for Amaru's dehydration?



SSESSMENT
QUESTIONS:
DEHYDRATION
7. Dano is eight months old and weighs 6 kg. He has had diarrhoea for a week and is very sick. He is
breathing adequately and is not in shock. The health worker sees that Dano's eyes are sunken. When
encouraged, Dano is able to take a sip of water, but drinks poorly. A skin pinch goes back very slowly. The
health worker finds Dano has diarrhoea with severe dehydration. He is not severely malnourished. How
much IV fluid should be given to Dano in the first hour?
Should the health worker give Dano ORS solution? If so, how much?
8. Sharita is nine months old and weighs 7 kg. Her mother brings her to the clinic because she has had
diarrhoea for a week. The mother tells the health worker that Sharita is no longer breastfed, and is too tired
to drink from a cup. The health worker assesses Sharita. He finds that she is breathing adequately. Her
hands are cold and her pulse is weak and fast. He decides that she is in shock. She is lethargic, has
sunken eyes, and a skin pinch goes back very slowly. The health worker decides Sharita has severe
dehydration. She is not malnourished. What emergency treatment should the health worker give Sharita?



OITARDYHED
:SNOITSEUQ
TNEMSSESSA
9. Rogit, an 18-month-old boy weighing 8 kg, is brought to the small hospital very late at night. The health
worker assesses the boy and finds that he is alert and crying and not in shock. He can drink, but very
poorly, and a skin pinch goes back very slowly. The health worker decides the child has diarrhoea with
severe dehydration. He is not malnourished.
The child needs fluid for severe dehydration given according to Plan C, but the health worker is not trained
to give IV therapy. The last nurse has left for the night and no other nurses will come in for several hours.
The health worker is trained to give nasogastric therapy and has ORS available. How should Rogit be
rehydrated?
How much fluid should the health worker give initially?
10. A one-year old girl has a two-day history of diarrhoea and vomiting. Her weight is 6.5 kg. She is restless
and irritable. Her airway and breathing are OK. Her hands are warm. AVPU=voice. Skin pinch lasts 4
seconds. Her eyes are sunken and the mother confirms this fact. She is skin and bones. How do you
manage her?



Case management
scenarios
This module will give you an opportunity in different role plays all you have
learned so far. You will work in a team and practice the skills of triage and
emergency management. It gives you an opportunity to internalize the knowledge,
and to ask questions about items which are not clear.






Implementing ETAT
When you complete this course, your work to implement ETAT will just begin.
As we discussed in the first session, ETAT is the first component in the WHO
referral care manual entitled “Management of the Child with Serious Infection or
Severe Malnutrition: Guidelines for care at the first-referral level in developing countries”.
Thus, depending upon your position, you may choose to implement ETAT as a
single initiative or as the first component of an overall effort to improve the
quality of care of seriously ill children in your hospital, including inpatient care
of serious infections and severe malnutrition. Likewise, your hospital may choose
to implement ETAT on its own, or it may become part of a multiple-hospital
quality improvement collaboration to implement ETAT, or to improve the quality
of care of hospitalized children, sharing experiences and results to rapidly learn
the best way to successfully implement ETAT and decrease hospital mortality
and morbidity of sick children.
Whatever your choice, one thing is clear – ETAT is not simply a matter of
training, it will require that you and your colleagues change the system of care
for children presenting with emergency conditions. Staff knowledge and skills
are necessary but not sufficient for successful implementation of ETAT.
This chapter will help you prepare for implementation based on whichever choice
is right for your hospital:
(cid:132) Implementation of ETAT in one hospital alone or
(cid:132) Implementation of ETAT in a multiple hospital collaborative effort
(cid:132) Implementation of ETAT as a single component or
(cid:132) Implementation of ETAT as the first component of a more
comprehensive effort to improve the quality of care of hospitalized
children with serious infections or severe malnutrition (improve care
according to the guidelines)
Objectives of the chapter/session
By the end of this session on implementation of ETAT, you will be able to:
(cid:132) Understand and explain the role of ETAT within the overall
management of the child with serious infection or severe malnutrition
(cid:132) Describe why both knowledge/skills and system changes (process
improvement) are needed to successfully implement ETAT



(cid:132)
sites/regionally)
(cid:132) Develop action plans to initiate the system changes (improvement
process) needed to implement ETAT in his/her hospital
(cid:132) Decide how to know that ETAT is successfully implemented in your
hospital (or within a collaboration of hospitals implementing ETAT)
(cid:132) Describe the value of working collaboratively across hospitals to
improve the care of children with emergency conditions (and with
serious infections or severe malnutrition)
(cid:132) Describe and understand how ETAT training fits into wider context of
improvement initiatives in place in your country which address the
quality of care for children in hospital.
Implementing ETAT in your hospital
This consists of the following steps:
(cid:132) Baseline assessment of current practices – focused on ETAT or as part
of PHI assessment; select indicators for ongoing measurement of
improvement
(cid:132) Flow diagram of care – where are children with emergency conditions
seen now?
(cid:132) Statistics of care – hospital under 5five death rates overall and by
condition, within first 24 hours of admission; on ward after 24 hours
(cid:132) Identify the staff involved in ETAT and your ETAT improvement team
(cid:132) Skills and knowledge development – plan how to transfer ETAT
training from TOT course to your onsite staff
(cid:132) Use results of assessment to identify key changes you need to make to
implement ETAT guidelines.
Implementation of ETAT is in the first place a matter of management and
decision-making. Cost and benefits are most important aspects of the decision
making process. You can assist managers in this process by providing information.
Why? What arguments can you give to decision-makers to implement
ETAT in your working place? (advocacy)
Who? What staff categories should be involved in ETAT?
Where? Where should it take place?
When? When should it be done? (Patient flow and tasks)
What? What extra equipment and suppliers are needed, which are not
yet available now? (material resources)
Advocacy
Consider preventable death, death within 24 hours after admission, delay in
treatment waiting, time doctor’s delay, ethics, professional standards, human
suffering. Brainstorm on the importance of these factors in your working
situation. List your arguments in a convincing form.



It can be helpful to draw a floor map of the emergency and/or paediatric
departments. Where are the largest members of patients waiting? Is it possible
to involve ancillary staff in emergency assessment (gate keepers, watchmen,
clerks)?
Is it feasible to allocate space for emergency management near the waiting room?
Material Resources
Annex 2 contains a list of requirements for ETAT (equipment and supplies).
Check if each of the items is available in the hospital and in the emergency
department. List the items not available.
Prepare a summary of your findings in the form of recommendations to the
hospital superintendent or the hospital management board.
Developing individual plans of actions
(cid:132) Plan framework
Table 14
Suggested table
Objectives Activities Time Frame Requirements Cost Responsible Source
persons of funds
J F M A M J J A S O N D


#### [Table Content]
| Table 14 Suggested table |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Objectives | Activities | Time Frame |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Requirements | Cost | Responsible persons | Source of funds |
|  |  | J | F | M | A | M | J | J | A | S | O | N | D |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |







Practical procedures
Giving Parenteral fluids
VASCULAR ACCESS Scalp veins
Select a suitable vein to place the cannula (22 or 24 gauge)
External jugular
or butterfly needle (gauge 21 or 23). Suitable sites are
Antecubital
shown in Figure 33.
PERIPHERAL VEIN
Veins on dorsum Femoral vein
Identify an accessible peripheral vein. In young children
aged >2 months, this is usually the cephalic vein in the
antecubital fossa or the fourth interdigital vein on the back
of the hand.
Ankle veins
(cid:132) An assistant should keep the position of the limb
steady and should act as a tourniquet by obstructing
Figure 33
the venous return with his fingers lightly closed
Sites for IV access in infants and children
around the limb. Alternatively, use a rubber glove
or tubing as a tourniquet.
(cid:132) Clean the surrounding skin with an antiseptic
solution (such as spirit, iodine, isopropyl alcohol, or
70% alcohol solution), then introduce the cannula
into the vein and insert most of its length. Fix the
cannula securely with tape. Apply a splint with the
limb in an appropriate position (e.g. elbow extended,
wrist slightly flexed).
Figure 34
Splinted arm for IV infusion


#### [Table Content]
| Scalp veins External jugular Antecubital Veins on dorsum Femoral vein Ankle veins |
| --- |
| Figure 33 Sites for IV access in infants and children |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 34 Splinted arm for IV infusion |




These are often used in children aged <2 years but work best in young infants.
The frontal superficial, temporal posterior, auricular, supra-orbital and posterior
facial veins can be used. Scalp vein infusions have the advantage of not greatly
restricting the child’s movements.
(cid:132) Find a suitable scalp vein (usually in the midline of
the forehead, the temporal area, or above or behind
the ear).
(cid:132) Shave the area and clean the skin with an antiseptic
solution. The assistant should occlude the vein
proximal to the site of puncture. Fill the butterfly
set tubing with saline either by attaching it to the
infusion-giving set and then disconnecting it or by
flushing the butterfly set. Disconnect the syringe and
leave the end of the tubing open. Introduce the
butterfly needle as described above. Blood flowing
back slowly through the tubing indicates that the
needle is in the vein.
(cid:132) Use adhesive plaster and a gauze pad under the
needle to secure the needle at an angle to the scalp.
Care should be taken not to cannulate an artery,
Figure 35 which is recognized by palpation. If there should be
Inserting a butterfly needle in a scalp vein a pulsatile spurt of blood, withdraw the needle and
apply pressure until the bleeding stops; then look
for a vein.
CARE OF THE CANNULA
Secure the cannula when introduced. This may require the splinting of
neighbouring joints to limit the movement of the cannula. Keep the overlying
skin clean and dry. Clean it daily with an antiseptic solution.
To minimize the risk of infection, the cannula should not
be kept in the same site for longer than necessary, and
should be removed if complications develop.
EXTERNAL JUGULAR VEIN
(cid:132) Hold the child securely, with the head turned to one
side away from the puncture site and slightly lower
than the body (15-30 degree head-down position).
(The vein will fill in this position and should be
visible as it travels towards the clavicle in the
supraclavicular fossa). Restrain the child as necessary
in this position.
Figure 36
Inserting a cannula into the external jugular
vein


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 35 Inserting a butterfly needle in a scalp vein |

|  |
| --- |
| Figure 36 Inserting a cannula into the external jugular vein |




When carried out by a well-trained and experienced health
worker, intraosseous infusion is a simple and reliable
method of giving fluid and drugs in an emergency. The
method is safe if the needle is left in place no longer than
6-8 hours. All parenteral fluids and drugs recommended
in these guidelines can be given by this route.
In an emergency this may be the first choice if access to a
peripheral vein does not appear to be obtainable. It takes
1-2 minutes to establish intraosseous access. The procedure
is painful, but no anaesthetic is required as it should only
be used in an emergency (e.g. when a child is in shock).
Contra-indications:
(cid:132) Infection at the intended puncture site
Figure 37
(cid:132) Fracture of the bone (relative contraindication,
Intraosseous infusion. Infusion needle in place
not for shock, only for dehydration).
in the proximal medial part of the tibia
The first choice for the puncture is the proximal tibia. The
site for needle insertion is in antero-medial surface of the
tibia, 1-2 cm below the tibial tuberosity (2 finger breadths in children, 1 finger
breadths in infants). An alternative site for needle insertion is the distal femur,
2 cm above the lateral condyle.
(cid:132) Prepare the necessary equipment:
- Bone marrow aspiration or intraosseous needles (15-18 gauge or, if
not available, 21 gauge; if no special needles are available, large-bore
(21 FG) hypodermic or butterfly needles can be used in young
children)
- Antiseptic solution and sterile gauze to clean the site
- A sterile 5-ml syringe filled with normal saline
- A second sterile 5-ml syringe filled with normal saline
- IV infusion equipment
- Sterile gloves.
(cid:132) Select the site for cannulation:
- First, palpate the tibial tuberosity
- Then, locate one finger’s breadth below and medial to the tuberosity
(the bone can be felt under the skin at this site).
(cid:132) Wash the hands and put on sterile gloves.
(cid:132) Clean the skin over and surrounding the site with an antiseptic
solution.
(cid:132) Stabilize the proximal tibia with the left hand (this hand is now not
sterile) by grasping the thigh and knee above and lateral to the
cannulation site, with the fingers and thumb wrapped around the knee
but not directly behind the insertion site.
(cid:132) Palpate the landmarks again with the sterile glove (right hand).
(cid:132) Insert the needle at a 90Ú angle to the bone with the bevel pointing
towards the foot. Advance the needle using a gentle but firm, twisting
or drilling motion.
(cid:132) Stop advancing the needle when you feel a sudden decrease in
resistance. The needle should be fixed in the bone.



(cid:132)
(cid:132) Aspirate 1 ml of the marrow contents (looks like blood), using the 5 ml
syringe, to confirm that the needle is in the marrow cavity.
(cid:132) Flush the needle with 5 ml of infusion solution
(cid:132) The fluid infusion can be started.
Note: While the fluid is being infused, only a slight resistance should be felt,
and there should be no visible or palpable infiltration in the area of infusion.
Failure to aspirate marrow contents does not mean that the needle is not correctly
placed.
(cid:132) Apply dressings and secure the needle in its place.
(cid:132) Monitor the infusion by the ease with which the fluid flows and by the
clinical response of the patient.
(cid:132) Check that the calf does not swell during the infusion and the toes
remain pink.
(cid:132) If the child cries inconsolably, check the toes and calf.
(cid:132) Consider starting the child on antibiotics for five days if not already
started.
Stop the intraosseous infusion as soon as venous access is available. In any case,
it should not continue for more than 8 hours.
Complications include:
(cid:132) Incomplete penetration of the bony cortex
Signs: The needle is not well fixed; infiltration occurs under the skin
Action: The needle must be pushed in further into the bone.
(cid:132) Penetration of the posterior bone cortex (more common)
Sign: Infiltration occurs (calf becomes tense), with the needle well fixed
Action: Remove the needle and repeat at another site.
(cid:132) Blockage of the needle by marrow (uncommon)
Sign: Infusion stops
Action: The line must be flushed by 5 ml of normal saline.
(cid:132) Infection
Signs: Cellulitis at the site of the infusion (this is rare if the infusion is
left for less than 8 hours; osteomyelitis is rare)
Action: Remove the intraosseous needle unless it is essential; give local
skin care and antibiotic treatment.
Consider giving antibiotics.
(cid:132) Necrosis and sloughing of the skin at the site of the infusion (this
occurs particularly when drugs such as adrenaline, calcium chloride or
sodium bicarbonate pass into the tissues).
Action: Avoid by infusing gently and not under pressure.
IV DRUG ADMINISTRATION THROUGH AN INDWELLING CANNULA
Attach the syringe containing the IV drug to the injection port of the cannula
and introduce the drug. Once all the drug has been given, inject 0.5 ml heparin
solution (10-100 units/ml) into the cannula unit until all the blood has been
expelled and the catheter is filled with the solution.
If heparin is not available, normal saline or 5% glucose solution can be used,
but the risk of clot formation in the cannula is higher.



A nasogastric tube (size 8 French gauge for children) for fluids or food may have
to be passed into the child’s stomach, e.g. to feed a severely malnourished child
who is anorexic, or to give fluids (e.g. glucose) to an unconscious child.
Holding the tip of the tube against the child’s nose, measure the distance from
the nose to the ear lobe, then to the xiphisternum (epigastrium). Mark the tube
at this point.
Hold the child firmly. Lubricate the tip of the catheter with water and pass it
directly into one nostril, pushing it slowly in. It should pass easily down into the
stomach without resistance. When the measured distance is reached, fix the
tube with tape at the nose.
Figure 38
Inserting a nasogastric tube. The distance is measured from the nose to the
ear and then to the epigastrium, and then the tube is inserted to the
measured distance
Aspirate a small amount of stomach contents with a syringe to confirm that the
tube is in place (check that it turns blue litmus paper pink). If no aspirate is
obtained, inject air down the tube and listen over the abdomen with a stethoscope
(note, however, that the latter method can lead to errors if not carried out
carefully). If the tube is in the stomach, air can be heard entering the stomach.
If the tube is not in the stomach, any aspirate obtained will not turn blue litmus
paper pink and the sound of injected air will not be heard over the abdomen. If
there is any doubt about the location of the tube, withdraw it and start again.
The major complication is when the tube inadvertently passes into the trachea.
This leads to distress in the child, an abnormal cry in infants, or cyanosis. If this
happens, remove the tube immediately and try again to pass it into the stomach
after the child has recovered.
(cid:132) When the tube is in place, fix a 20 ml syringe (without the plunger) to
the end of the tube, and pour food or fluid into the syringe, allowing it
to flow by gravity.
The nasogastric tube can be left in position for several days. If there is doubt
about the position of the tube, check that it is correctly in place before giving
the feed.


#### [Table Content]
|  |
| --- |
| Figure 38 Inserting a nasogastric tube. The distance is measured from the nose to the ear and then to the epigastrium, and then the tube is inserted to the measured distance |




therapy is to be given by nasopharyngeal catheter at the same time, pass both
tubes down the same nostril and try to keep the other nostril patent by wiping
away crusts and secretions.



Resources required to
implement emergency
care of children in hospitals
The following list gives you equipment which is needed to implement emergency
care in your emergency or outpatient department, and to train staff in performing
the emergency management. After training, you should have these items available
in the emergency area of the outpatient department as well as in the ward.
While you are checking for its availability, find out whether it is available
elsewhere in the hospital, and you can make it available where you need it.
Therefore, there is another column provided which is labeled “hospital” in the
check list.
Equipment
Infant sized doll
Child sized doll
Orophargngeal (Guedel) Airways: at least 3 different sizes
Self-inflating bags: adult
Self-inflating bags: children
Masks: 3 sizes for children
Electric (or foot) suction pump
Suction catheters: size 15 F.G.
Oxygen concentrator or oxygen cylinder with regulator, pressure gauge and flow meter
Oxygen tubing, nasal prongs or catheters
Sandbags
Blankets
department Emergency Paediatric
ward
Hospital


#### [Table Content]
| Equipment | department Emergency | Paediatric ward | Hospital |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Infant sized doll |  |  |  |
| Child sized doll |  |  |  |
| Orophargngeal (Guedel) Airways: at least 3 different sizes |  |  |  |
| Self-inflating bags: adult |  |  |  |
| Self-inflating bags: children |  |  |  |
| Masks: 3 sizes for children |  |  |  |
| Electric (or foot) suction pump |  |  |  |
| Suction catheters: size 15 F.G. |  |  |  |
| Oxygen concentrator or oxygen cylinder with regulator, pressure gauge and flow meter |  |  |  |
| Oxygen tubing, nasal prongs or catheters |  |  |  |
| Sandbags |  |  |  |
| Blankets |  |  |  |




After you have checked for the availability, list requirements here in order of priority.
department Emergency Paediatric
ward
Hospital
Consumables
Adhesive tape, at least 2 different sizes
Cotton wool
Cardboard to make splints
IV Infusion sets
Scalp vein needles (size 21 or 23 G)
IV Cannulae (size 22 or 24 G)
Needles for intraosseous insertion (size 21G)
Tuberculin syringes
Test strips and scale for blood sugar
Fluids and drugs
Ringer’s lactate or normal saline
Half-strength Darrow’s with 5% glucose solution, or half-normal saline with 5% glucose
solution
Glucose 10% or 50% glucose
ORS
ReSoMal (commercially bought or prepared)
Diazepam IV or paraldehyde
Equipment Consumables
1. 1.
2. 2.
3. 3.
4. 4.
5. 5.
6. 6.
7. 7.
8. 8.
9. 9.
10. 10.


#### [Table Content]
| Equipment | Consumables |
| --- | --- |
| 1. | 1. |
| 2. | 2. |
| 3. | 3. |
| 4. | 4. |
| 5. | 5. |
| 6. | 6. |
| 7. | 7. |
| 8. | 8. |
| 9. | 9. |
| 10. | 10. |




ETAT charts
CHART 2. Triage of all sick children1
EMERGENCY SIGNS
If any sign positive: give treatment(s), call for help, draw blood for emergency laboratory
investigations (glucose, malaria smear, Hb)
ASSESS TREAT
Do not move neck if cervical spine injury
possible
1. Airway and breathing If foreign body aspiration
ANY SIGN
(cid:132) Obstructed breathing, (cid:132) Manage airway in choking child
POSITIVE
or (Chart 3)
(cid:132) Central cyanosis,
or If no foreign body aspiration
(cid:132) Severe respiratory distress (cid:132) Manage airway (Chart 4)
(cid:132) Give oxygen (Chart 5)
(cid:132) Make sure child is warm
2. Circulation (cid:132) Stop any bleeding
ANY SIGN
Cold hands with: (cid:132) Give oxygen (Chart 5)
POSITIVE
(cid:132) Capillary refill longer than (cid:132) Make sure child is warm
3 seconds,
Check for
and If no severe malnutrition:
severe
(cid:132) Weak and fast pulse malnutrition (cid:132) Insert IV and begin giving fluids
rapidly (Chart 7). If not able to insert
peripheral IV, insert an external
jugular or intraosseous line
If severe malnutrition:
If lethargic or unconscious:
(cid:132) Give IV glucose (Chart 10)
(cid:132) Insert IV line and give fluids (Chart 8)
If not lethargic or unconscious:
(cid:132) Give glucose orally or by NG tube
(cid:132) Proceed immediately to full
assessment and treatment
1 The numbering of charts in this course starts with Chart 2, in line of the numbering of charts in the "Pocket book of


#### [Table Content]
| CHART 2. Triage of all sick children1 |
| --- |
| EMERGENCY SIGNS If any sign positive: give treatment(s), call for help, draw blood for emergency laboratory investigations (glucose, malaria smear, Hb) ASSESS TREAT Do not move neck if cervical spine injury possible 1. Airway and breathing If foreign body aspiration ANY SIGN (cid:132) Obstructed breathing, (cid:132) Manage airway in choking child POSITIVE or (Chart 3) (cid:132) Central cyanosis, or If no foreign body aspiration (cid:132) Severe respiratory distress (cid:132) Manage airway (Chart 4) (cid:132) Give oxygen (Chart 5) (cid:132) Make sure child is warm 2. Circulation (cid:132) Stop any bleeding ANY SIGN Cold hands with: (cid:132) Give oxygen (Chart 5) POSITIVE (cid:132) Capillary refill longer than (cid:132) Make sure child is warm 3 seconds, Check for and If no severe malnutrition: severe (cid:132) Weak and fast pulse malnutrition (cid:132) Insert IV and begin giving fluids rapidly (Chart 7). If not able to insert peripheral IV, insert an external jugular or intraosseous line If severe malnutrition: If lethargic or unconscious: (cid:132) Give IV glucose (Chart 10) (cid:132) Insert IV line and give fluids (Chart 8) If not lethargic or unconscious: (cid:132) Give glucose orally or by NG tube (cid:132) Proceed immediately to full assessment and treatment |




CHART 2. Triage of all sick children (continued)
EMERGENCY SIGNS
If any sign positive: give treatment(s), call for help, draw blood for emergency laboratory
investigations (glucose, malaria smear, Hb)
ASSESS TREAT
Do not move neck if cervical spine injury
possible
3. Coma/convulsing IF COMA OR (cid:132) Manage airway (Chart 4)
(cid:132) Coma CONVULSING (cid:132) If convulsing, give diazepam or
or paraldehyde rectally (Chart 9)
(cid:132) Convulsing (now) (cid:132) Position the unconscious child (if
head or neck trauma is suspected,
stabilize the neck first) (Chart 6)
(cid:132) Give IV glucose (Chart 10)
4. Severe dehydration (cid:132) Make sure child is warm.
DIARRHOEA
(only in child with
plus TWO
diarrhoea) If no severe malnutrition:
SIGNS
Diarrhoea plus any two (cid:132) Insert IV line and begin giving fluids
POSITIVE
of these: rapidly and Diarrhoea Treatment Plan
(cid:132) Lethargy Check for C in hospital
(cid:132) Sunken eyes severe
(cid:132) Very slow skin pinch malnutrition If severe malnutrition:
(cid:132) Do not insert IV
(cid:132) Proceed immediately to full
assessment and treatment
PRIORITY SIGNS
These children need prompt assessment and treatment
(cid:132) Tiny baby (<2 months)
(cid:132) Temperature very high
(cid:132) Trauma or other urgent surgical condition
(cid:132) Pallor (severe)
(cid:132) Poisoning (history of)
(cid:132) Pain (severe)
(cid:132) Respiratory distress
(cid:132) Restless, continuously irritable, or lethargic
(cid:132) Referral (urgent) Note: If a child has trauma or other
(cid:132) Malnutrition: Visible severe wasting surgical problems, get surgical help
(cid:132) Oedema of both feet or follow surgical guidelines
(cid:132) Burns (major)
NON-URGENT
Proceed with assessment and further treatment according to the child's priority



CHART 3. How to manage a choking child
Back slaps Chest thrusts
(cid:132) Lay the infant on your arm or thigh in a head down position
(cid:132) Give 5 blows to the infant’s back with heel of hand
(cid:132) If obstruction persists, turn infant over and give 5 chest thrusts with 2 fingers, one finger
breadth below nipple level in midline (see diagram)
(cid:132) If obstruction persists, check infant’s mouth for any obstruction which can be removed
(cid:132) If necessary, repeat sequence with back slaps again
Slapping the back to clear airway
obstruction in a choking child
(cid:132) Give 5 blows to the child’s back with heel of hand with
child sitting, kneeling or lying
(cid:132) If the obstruction persists, go behind the child and pass
your arms around the child’s body; form a fist with one
hand immediately below the child’s sternum; place the
other hand over the fist and pull upwards into the
abdomen (see diagram); repeat this Heimlich manoeuvre 5 times
Heimlich manoeuvre in a
(cid:132) If the obstruction persists, check the child’s mouth for any obstruction which can be
removed choking older child
(cid:132) If necessary, repeat this sequence with back
slaps again



CHART 4. How to manage the airway in a child with
obstructed breathing (or who has just stopped breathing)
NO NECK TRAUMA IS SUSPECTED
Infant Older
children
Neutral position to open the Sniffing position to open the
airway in an infant airway in an older child
Child conscious
(cid:132) Inspect mouth and remove foreign body, if
present
(cid:132) Clear secretions from throat
(cid:132) Let child assume position of maximal
comfort
Child unconscious
(cid:132) Tilt the head as shown
(cid:132) Inspect mouth and remove foreign body, if
present
(cid:132) Clear secretions from throat
(cid:132) Check the airway by looking for chest
movements, listening for breath sounds and
feeling for breath
Look, listen and feel for breathing
(cid:132) Follow guidelines in Chart 6
NECK TRAUMA OR POSSIBLE CERVICAL SPINE INJURY IS SUSPECTED
(cid:132) Stabilize the neck, as shown in Chart 6
(cid:132) Inspect mouth and remove foreign body, if present
(cid:132) Clear secretions from throat
(cid:132) Check the airway by looking for chest movements, listening for
breath sounds, and feeling for breath
Use jaw thrust without head tilt. If the child is still not breathing after
Place the 4th and 5th finger behind carrying out the above, ventilate
the angle of the jaw and move it with bag and mask
upwards so that the bottom of the
jaw is thrust forwards, at 90° to the
body



CHART 5. How to give oxygen
Give oxygen through nasal prongs or a nasal
catheter
Nasal Prongs
(cid:132) Place the prongs just inside the nostrils and
secure with tape
Nasal Prongs
Nasal Catheter
(cid:132) Use an 8 FG size tube
(cid:132) Measure the distance from the side of the
nostril to the inner eyebrow margin with the
catheter
(cid:132) Insert the catheter to this depth
(cid:132) Secure with tape
Start oxygen flow at 1-2 litres/minute
Nasal Catheter



CHART 6. How to position the unconscious child
If neck trauma is not suspected:
(cid:132) Turn the child on the side to reduce risk of aspiration
(cid:132) Keep the neck slightly extended and stabilize by placing cheek on one hand
(cid:132) Bend one leg to stabilize the body position
If neck trauma is suspected:
(cid:132) Stabilize the child's neck and keep the
child lying on the back
(cid:132) Tape the child's forehead to the sides of a
firm board to secure this position
(cid:132) Prevent the neck from moving by
supporting the child's head (e.g. using litre
bags of IV fluid on each side)
(cid:132) If vomiting, turn on the side, keeping the
head in line with the body



CHART 7. How to give IV fluids rapidly for shock in a child
without severe malnutrition
(cid:132) If the child is severely malnourished the fluid volume and rate are different, so check
that the child is not severely malnourished
Shock in child without severe malnutrition — Chart 8
Shock in child with severe malnutrition — Chart 9
(cid:132) Insert an intravenous line (and draw blood for emergency laboratory investigations)
(cid:132) Attach Ringer’s lactate or normal saline—make sure the infusion is running well
(cid:132) Infuse 20 ml/kg as rapidly as possible
Age/weight Volume of Ringer’s lactate or normal saline solution
(20 ml/kg)
2 months (<4 kg) 75 ml
2–<4 months (4–<6 kg) 100 ml
4–<12 months (6–<10 kg) 150 ml
1–<3 years (10–<14 kg) 250 ml
3–<5 years (14–19 kg) 350 ml
Reassess child after appropriate volume has run in
Reassess after first infusion: If no improvement, repeat 20 ml/kg as rapidly as
possible
Reassess after second infusion: If no improvement, repeat 20 ml/kg as rapidly as
possible
Reassess after third infusion: If no improvement, give blood 20 ml/kg over 30
minutes, unless the child has profuse diarrhoea
Reassess after fourth infusion: If no improvement, see disease specific treatment
guidelines. You should have established a
provisional diagnosis by now.
After improvement at any stage (pulse slows, faster capillary refill), go to Chart 11.



CHART 8. How to give IV fluids for shock in a child with severe
malnutrition
Give this treatment only if the child has signs of shock and is lethargic or has lost
consciousness:
(cid:132) Insert an IV line (and draw blood for emergency laboratory investigations)
(cid:132) Weigh the child (or estimate the weight) to calculate the volume of fluid to be given
(cid:132) Give IV fluid 15 ml/kg over 1 hour. Use one of the following solutions (in order of
preference) according to availability:
- Ringer's lactate with 5% glucose (dextrose); or
- half-normal saline with 5% glucose (dextrose); or
- half-strength Darrow's solution with 5% glucose (dextrose); or, if these are unavailable,
- Ringer's lactate.
Weight Volume IV fluid Weight Volume IV fluid
Give over 1 hour (15 ml/kg) Give over 1 hour (15 ml/kg)
4 kg 60 ml 12 kg 180 ml
6 kg 90 ml 14 kg 210 ml
8 kg 120 ml 16 kg 240 ml
10 kg 150 ml 18 kg 270 ml
(cid:132) Measure the pulse and breathing rate at the start and every 5-10 minutes.
If there are signs of improvement:
- give repeat IV 15 ml/kg over 1 hour; then
- switch to oral or nasogastric rehydration with ReSoMal, 10 ml/kg/h up to 10 hours;
then
- initiate refeeding with starter F-75.
If the child fails to improve after the first 15ml/kg IV, assume the child has septic shock:
- give maintenance IV fluid (4 ml/kg/h) while waiting for blood;
- when blood is available, transfuse fresh whole blood at 10 ml/kg slowly over 3 hours
(use packed cells if in cardiac failure); then
- initiate refeeding with starter F-75 .
- start antibiotic treatment.
If the child deteriorates during the IV rehydration (breathing increases by 5 breaths/min
or pulse by 15 beats/min), stop the infusion because IV fluid can worsen the child's
condition.



CHART 9. How to give diazepam (or paraldehyde) rectally
Give diazepam rectally:
(cid:132) Draw up the dose from an ampoule of diazepam into a tuberculin (1 ml) syringe. Base
the dose on the weight of the child, where possible. Then remove the needle.
(cid:132) Insert the syringe into the rectum 4 to 5 cm and inject the diazepam solution.
(cid:132) Hold buttocks together for a few minutes.
Diazepam given rectally Paraldehyde given
10 mg/2ml solution rectally
Age/weight Dose 0.1ml/kg Dose 0.3-0.4 ml/kg
2 weeks to 2 months (< 4 kg)* 0.3 ml (1.5 mg) 1.0 ml
2-<4 months (4-<6 kg) 0.5 ml (2.5 mg) 1.6 ml
4-<12 months (6--<10 kg) 1.0 ml (5 mg) 2.4 ml
1-<3 years (10-<14 kg) 1.25 ml (6.25 mg) 4 ml
3-<5 years (14-19 kg) 1.5 ml (7.5 mg) 5 ml
If convulsion continues after 10 minutes, give a second dose of diazepam rectally (or
give diazepam intravenously (0.05 ml/kg) if IV infusion is running).
If convulsion continues after another 10 minutes, give a third dose of diazepam or
give paraldehyde rectally (or phenobarbital IV or IM 15 mg/kg).
If high fever:
(cid:132) Sponge the child with room-temperature water to reduce the fever.
(cid:132) Do not give oral medication until the convulsion has been controlled (danger of
aspiration).
* Use phenobarbital (200 mg/ml solution) in a dose of 20 mg/kg to control convulsions in
infants <2 weeks of age:
Weight 2 kg-initial dose: 0.2 ml, repeat 0.1 ml after 30 minutes If convulsions
Weight 3 kg-initial dose: 0.3 ml, repeat 0.15 ml after 30 minutes continue


#### [Table Content]
| Diazepam given rectally Paraldehyde given 10 mg/2ml solution rectally |
| --- |
| Age/weight Dose 0.1ml/kg Dose 0.3-0.4 ml/kg |




CHART 10. How to give IV glucose
(cid:132) Insert IV line and draw blood rapidly for emergency laboratory investigations
(cid:132) Check blood glucose. If low (<2.5 mmol/litre (45 mg/dl) in a well nourished or <3 mmol/
litre (55 mg/dl) in a severely malnourished child) or if dextrostix is not available:
(cid:132) Give 5 ml/kg of 10% glucose solution rapidly by IV injection
Age/weight Volume of 10% glucose solution to give
as bolus (5 ml/kg)
Less than 2 months (<4 kg) 15 ml
2–<4 months (4–<6 kg) 25 ml
4–<12 months (6–<10 kg) 40 ml
1–<3 years (10–<14 kg) 60 ml
3–<5 years (14–19 kg) 80 ml
(cid:132) Recheck the blood glucose in 30 minutes. If it is still low, repeat 5 ml/kg of 10% glucose
solution.
(cid:132) Feed the child as soon as conscious.
If not able to feed without danger of aspiration, give:
- milk or sugar solution via nasogastric tube (to make sugar solution, dissolve 4 level
teaspoons of sugar (20 grams) in a 200-ml cup of clean water), or
- IV containing 5-10% glucose (dextrose)
Note: 50% glucose solution is the same as 50% dextrose solution or D50. If only 50%
glucose solution is available: dilute 1 part 50% glucose solution to 4 parts sterile water, or
dilute 1 part 50% glucose solution to 9 parts 5% glucose solution.
Note: For reliable results, take great care with the dextrostix test. The strip must be stored
in its box, at 2-3 °C, avoiding sunlight or high humidity. A drop of blood should be placed on
the strip (it is necessary to cover all the reagent area). After 60 seconds, the blood should
be washed off gently with drops of cold water and the colour compared with the key on the
bottle or on the blood glucose reader. (The exact procedure will vary with different strips.)



CHART 11. How to treat severe dehydration in an emergency
setting
For children with severe dehydration but without shock, refer to Table 12, page 47.
If the child is in shock, first follow the instructions in Charts 7 and 8. Switch to the present
chart when the child's pulse becomes slower or the capillary refill is faster.
Give 70 ml/kg of Ringer's lactate solution (or, if not available, normal saline) over 5 hours in
infants (aged <12 months) and over 21/2 hours in children (aged 12 months to 5 years).
Total volume IV fluid (volume per hour)
Age <12 months Age 12 months to 5 years
Weight Give over 5 hours Give over 2.5 hours
<4 kg 200 ml (40 ml/h) -
4-<6 kg 350 ml (70 ml/h) -
6-<10 kg 550 ml (110 ml/h) 550 ml (220 ml/h)
10-<14 kg 850 ml (170 ml/h) 850 ml (340 ml/h)
14-19 kg 1200 ml (240 ml/h) 1200 ml (480 ml/h)
Reassess the child every 1-2 hours. If the hydration status is not improving, give the IV drip
more rapidly.
Also give ORS solution (about 5 ml/kg/hour) as soon as the child can drink; this is usually
after 3-4 hours (in infants) or 1-2 hours (in children).
Weight Volume of ORS solution per hour
<4 kg 15 ml
4–<6 kg 25 ml
6–<10 kg 40 ml
10–<14 kg 60 ml
14–19 kg 85 ml
Reassess after 6 hours (infants) and after 3 hours (children). Classify dehydration. Then
choose the appropriate plan (A, B, or C) to continue treatment.
If possible, observe the child for at least 6 hours after rehydration to be sure that the mother
can maintain hydration by giving the child ORS solution by mouth.


#### [Table Content]
| Total volume IV fluid (volume per hour) |
| --- |
| Age <12 months Age 12 months to 5 years Weight Give over 5 hours Give over 2.5 hours |




